0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
1
SegNet: A Deep Convolutional
Encoder-Decoder Architecture for Scene
Segmentation
Vijay Badrinarayanan, Alex Kendall, Roberto Cipolla, Senior Member, IEEE,
Abstract—We present a novel and practical deep fully convolutional neural network architecture for semantic pixel-wise segmentation
termed SegNet. This core trainable segmentation engine consists of an encoder network, a corresponding decoder network followed
by a pixel-wise classiﬁcation layer. The architecture of the encoder network is topologically identical to the 13 convolutional layers in the
VGG16 network [1]. The role of the decoder network is to map the low resolution encoder feature maps to full input resolution feature
maps for pixel-wise classiﬁcation. The novelty of SegNet lies is in the manner in which the decoder upsamples its lower resolution input
feature map(s). Speciﬁcally, the decoder uses pooling indices computed in the max-pooling step of the corresponding encoder to
perform non-linear upsampling. This eliminates the need for learning to upsample. The upsampled maps are sparse and are then
convolved with trainable ﬁlters to produce dense feature maps. We compare our proposed architecture with the widely adopted FCN [2]
and also with the well known DeepLab-LargeFOV [3], DeconvNet [4] architectures. This comparison reveals the memory versus
accuracy trade-off involved in achieving good segmentation performance.
SegNet was primarily motivated by scene understanding applications. Hence, it is designed to be efﬁcient both in terms of memory and
computational time during inference. It is also signiﬁcantly smaller in the number of trainable parameters than other competing
architectures and can be trained end-to-end using stochastic gradient descent. We also performed a controlled benchmark of SegNet
and other architectures on both road scenes and SUN RGB-D indoor scene segmentation tasks. These quantitative assessments
show that SegNet provides good performance with competitive inference time and most efﬁcient inference memory-wise as compared
to other architectures. We also provide a Caffe implementation of SegNet and a web demo at http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/.
Index Terms—Deep Convolutional Neural Networks, Semantic Pixel-Wise Segmentation, Indoor Scenes, Road Scenes, Encoder,
Decoder, Pooling, Upsampling.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
Semantic segmentation has a wide array of applications ranging
from scene understanding, inferring support-relationships among
objects to autonomous driving. Early methods that relied on low-
level vision cues have fast been superseded by popular machine
learning algorithms. In particular, deep learning has seen huge suc-
cess lately in handwritten digit recognition, speech, categorising
whole images and detecting objects in images [5], [6]. Now there
is an active interest for semantic pixel-wise labelling [7] [8], [9],
[2], [4], [10], [11], [12], [13], [3], [14], [15], [16]. However, some
of these recent approaches have tried to directly adopt deep archi-
tectures designed for category prediction to pixel-wise labelling
[7]. The results, although very encouraging, appear coarse [3].
This is primarily because max pooling and sub-sampling reduce
feature map resolution. Our motivation to design SegNet arises
from this need to map low resolution features to input resolution
for pixel-wise classiﬁcation. This mapping must produce features
which are useful for accurate boundary localization.
Our architecture, SegNet, is designed to be an efﬁcient ar-
chitecture for pixel-wise semantic segmentation. It is primarily
motivated by road scene understanding applications which require
the ability to model appearance (road, building), shape (cars,
 V . Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, R. Cipolla are with the Machine Intelli-
gence Lab, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, UK.
E-mail: vb292,agk34,cipolla@eng.cam.ac.ukpedestrians) and understand the spatial-relationship (context) be-
tween different classes such as road and side-walk. In typical road
scenes, the majority of the pixels belong to large classes such
as road, building and hence the network must produce smooth
segmentations. The engine must also have the ability to delineate
objects based on their shape despite their small size. Hence it is
important to retain boundary information in the extracted image
representation. From a computational perspective, it is necessary
for the network to be efﬁcient in terms of both memory and
computation time during inference. The ability to train end-to-end
in order to jointly optimise all the weights in the network using
an efﬁcient weight update technique such as stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) [17] is an additional beneﬁt since it is more easily
repeatable. The design of SegNet arose from a need to match these
criteria.
The encoder network in SegNet is topologically identical to
the convolutional layers in VGG16 [1]. We remove the fully
connected layers of VGG16 which makes the SegNet encoder
network signiﬁcantly smaller and easier to train than many other
recent architectures [2], [4], [11], [18]. The key component of
SegNet is the decoder network which consists of a hierarchy
of decoders one corresponding to each encoder. Of these, the
appropriate decoders use the max-pooling indices received from
the corresponding encoder to perform non-linear upsampling of
their input feature maps. This idea was inspired from an archi-
tecture designed for unsupervised feature learning [19]. Reusing
max-pooling indices in the decoding process has several practical0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
2
Fig. 1. SegNet predictions on road scenes and indoor scenes. To try our system yourself, please see our online web demo at http://mi.eng.cam.ac.
uk/projects/segnet/.
advantages; (i) it improves boundary delineation , (ii) it reduces the
number of parameters enabling end-to-end training, and (iii) this
form of upsampling can be incorporated into any encoder-decoder
architecture such as [2], [10] with only a little modiﬁcation.
One of the main contributions of this paper is our analysis
of the SegNet decoding technique and the widely used Fully
Convolutional Network (FCN) [2]. This is in order to convey
the practical trade-offs involved in designing segmentation archi-
tectures. Most recent deep architectures for segmentation have
identical encoder networks, i.e VGG16, but differ in the form
of the decoder network, training and inference. Another common
feature is they have trainable parameters in the order of hundreds
of millions and thus encounter difﬁculties in performing end-to-
end training [4]. The difﬁculty of training these networks has led
to multi-stage training [2], appending networks to a pre-trained
architecture such as FCN [10], use of supporting aids such as
region proposals for inference [4], disjoint training of classiﬁcation
and segmentation networks [18] and use of additional training data
for pre-training [11] [20] or for full training [10]. In addition,
performance boosting post-processing techniques [3] have also
been popular. Although all these factors improve performance on
challenging benchmarks [21], it is unfortunately difﬁcult from
their quantitative results to disentangle the key design factors
necessary to achieve good performance. We therefore analysed
the decoding process used in some of these approaches [2], [4]
and reveal their pros and cons.
We evaluate the performance of SegNet on two scene seg-
mentation tasks, CamVid road scene segmentation [22] and SUN
RGB-D indoor scene segmentation [23]. Pascal VOC12 [21] has
been the benchmark challenge for segmentation over the years.
However, the majority of this task has one or two foregroundclasses surrounded by a highly varied background. This implicitly
favours techniques used for detection as shown by the recent
work on a decoupled classiﬁcation-segmentation network [18]
where the classiﬁcation network can be trained with a large set of
weakly labelled data and the independent segmentation network
performance is improved. The method of [3] also use the feature
maps of the classiﬁcation network with an independent CRF post-
processing technique to perform segmentation. The performance
can also be boosted by the use additional inference aids such as
region proposals [4], [24]. Therefore, it is different from scene
understanding where the idea is to exploit co-occurrences of
objects and other spatial-context to perform robust segmentation.
To demonstrate the efﬁcacy of SegNet, we present a real-time
online demo of road scene segmentation into 11 classes of interest
for autonomous driving (see link in Fig. 1). Some example test
results produced on randomly sampled road scene images from
Google and indoor test scenes from the SUN RGB-D dataset [23]
are shown in Fig. 1.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec.
2 we review related recent literature. We describe the SegNet
architecture and its analysis in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4 we evaluate the
performance of SegNet on outdoor and indoor scene datasets. This
is followed by a general discussion regarding our approach with
pointers to future work in Sec. 5. We conclude in Sec. 6.
2 L ITERATURE REVIEW
Semantic pixel-wise segmentation is an active topic of research,
fuelled by challenging datasets [21], [22], [23], [25], [26]. Before
the arrival of deep networks, the best performing methods mostly
relied on hand engineered features classifying pixels indepen-
dently. Typically, a patch is fed into a classiﬁer e.g. Random0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
3
Forest [27], [28] or Boosting [29], [30] to predict the class
probabilities of the center pixel. Features based on appearance [27]
or SfM and appearance [28], [29], [30] have been explored for
the CamVid road scene understanding test [22]. These per-pixel
noisy predictions (often called unary terms) from the classiﬁers
are then smoothed by using a pair-wise or higher order CRF [29],
[30] to improve the accuracy. More recent approaches have aimed
to produce high quality unaries by trying to predict the labels
for all the pixels in a patch as opposed to only the center pixel.
This improves the results of Random Forest based unaries [31]
but thin structured classes are classiﬁed poorly. Dense depth maps
computed from the CamVid video have also been used as input
for classiﬁcation using Random Forests [32]. Another approach
argues for the use of a combination of popular hand designed
features and spatio-temporal super-pixelization to obtain higher
accuracy [33]. The best performing technique on the CamVid
test [30] addresses the imbalance among label frequencies by
combining object detection outputs with classiﬁer predictions in
a CRF framework. The result of all these techniques indicate the
need for improved features for classiﬁcation.
Indoor RGBD pixel-wise semantic segmentation has also
gained popularity since the release of the NYU dataset [25]. This
dataset showed the usefulness of the depth channel to improve
segmentation. Their approach used features such as RGB-SIFT,
depth-SIFT and pixel location as input to a neural network
classiﬁer to predict pixel unaries. The noisy unaries are then
smoothed using a CRF. Improvements were made using a richer
feature set including LBP and region segmentation to obtain higher
accuracy [34] followed by a CRF. In more recent work [25], both
class segmentation and support relationships are inferred together
using a combination of RGB and depth based cues. Another
approach focuses on real-time joint reconstruction and semantic
segmentation, where Random Forests are used as the classiﬁer
[35]. Gupta et al. [36] use boundary detection and hierarchical
grouping before performing category segmentation. The common
attribute in all these approaches is the use of hand engineered
features for classiﬁcation of either RGB or RGBD images.
The success of deep convolutional neural networks for object
classiﬁcation has more recently led researchers to exploit their fea-
ture learning capabilities for structured prediction problems such
as segmentation. There have also been attempts to apply networks
designed for object categorization to segmentation, particularly
by replicating the deepest layer features in blocks to match
image dimensions [7], [37], [38], [39]. However, the resulting
classiﬁcation is blocky [38]. Another approach using recurrent
neural networks [40] merges several low resolution predictions
to create input image resolution predictions. These techniques are
already an improvement over hand engineered features [7] but
their ability to delineate boundaries is poor.
Newer deep architectures [2], [4], [10], [13], [18] particularly
designed for segmentation have advanced the state-of-the-art by
learning to decode or map low resolution image representations
to pixel-wise predictions. The encoder network which produces
these low resolution representations in all of these architectures is
the VGG16 classiﬁcation network [1] which has 13 convolutional
layers and 3fully connected layers. This encoder network weights
are typically pre-trained on the large ImageNet object classiﬁ-
cation dataset [41]. The decoder network varies between these
architectures and is the part which is responsible for producing
multi-dimensional features for each pixel for classiﬁcation.
Each decoder in the Fully Convolutional Network (FCN)architecture [2] learns to upsample its input feature map(s) and
combines them with the corresponding encoder feature map to
produce the input to the next decoder. It is an architecture which
has a large number of trainable parameters in the encoder network
(134M) but a very small decoder network (0.5M). The overall
large size of this network makes it hard to train end-to-end on
a relevant task. Therefore, the authors use a stage-wise training
process. Here each decoder in the decoder network is progressively
added to an existing trained network. The network is grown until
no further increase in performance is observed. This growth is
stopped after three decoders thus ignoring high resolution feature
maps can certainly lead to loss of edge information [4]. Apart
from training related issues, the need to reuse the encoder feature
maps in the decoder makes it memory intensive in test time. We
study this network in more detail as it the core of other recent
architectures [10], [11].
The predictive performance of FCN has been improved further
by appending the FCN with a recurrent neural network (RNN)
[10] and ﬁne-tuning them on large datasets [21], [42]. The RNN
layers mimic the sharp boundary delineation capabilities of CRFs
while exploiting the feature representation power of FCN’s. They
show a signiﬁcant improvement over FCN-8 but also show that
this difference is reduced when more training data is used to
train FCN-8. The main advantage of the CRF-RNN is revealed
when it is jointly trained with an architecture such as the FCN-
8. The fact that joint training helps is also shown in other recent
results [43], [44]. Interestingly, the deconvolutional network [4]
performs signiﬁcantly better than FCN although at the cost of
a more complex training and inference. This however raises the
question as to whether the perceived advantage of the CRF-RNN
would be reduced as the core feed-forward segmentation engine is
made better. In any case, the CRF-RNN network can be appended
to any deep segmentation architecture including SegNet.
Multi-scale deep architectures are also being pursued [13],
[44]. They come in two ﬂavours, (i) those which use input images
at a few scales and corresponding deep feature extraction net-
works, and (ii) those which combine feature maps from different
layers of a single deep architecture [45] [11]. The common idea
is to use features extracted at multiple scales to provide both
local and global context [46] and the using feature maps of the
early encoding layers retain more high frequency detail leading to
sharper class boundaries. Some of these architectures are difﬁcult
to train due to their parameter size [13]. Thus a multi-stage training
process is employed along with data augmentation. The inference
is also expensive with multiple convolutional pathways for feature
extraction. Others [44] append a CRF to their multi-scale network
and jointly train them. However, these are not feed-forward at test
time and require optimization to determine the MAP labels.
Several of the recently proposed deep architectures for seg-
mentation are not feed-forward in inference time [4], [3], [18].
They require either MAP inference over a CRF [44], [43] or
aids such as region proposals [4] for inference. We believe the
perceived performance increase obtained by using a CRF is due
to the lack of good decoding techniques in their core feed-forward
segmentation engine. SegNet on the other hand uses decoders to
obtain features for accurate pixel-wise classiﬁcation.
The recently proposed Deconvolutional Network [4] and its
semi-supervised variant the Decoupled network [18] use the max
locations of the encoder feature maps (pooling indices) to perform
non-linear upsampling in the decoder network. The authors of
these architectures, independently of SegNet (ﬁrst submitted to0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
4
Convolutional Encoder-Decoder
 
Pooling IndicesInput
SegmentationOutput
Conv + Batch Normalisation + ReLUPooling Upsampling
Softmax
RGB Image
Fig. 2. An illustration of the SegNet architecture. There are no fully connected layers and hence it is only convolutional. A decoder upsamples its
input using the transferred pool indices from its encoder to produce a sparse feature map(s). It then performs convolution with a trainable ﬁlter bank
to densify the feature map. The ﬁnal decoder output feature maps are fed to a soft-max classiﬁer for pixel-wise classiﬁcation.
CVPR 2015 [12]), proposed this idea of decoding in the decoder
network. However, their encoder network consists of the fully con-
nected layers from the VGG-16 network which consists of about
90% of the parameters of their entire network. This makes training
of their network very difﬁcult and thus require additional aids such
as the use of region proposals to enable training. Moreover, during
inference these proposals are used and this increases inference
time signiﬁcantly. From a benchmarking point of view, this also
makes it difﬁcult to evaluate the performance of their architecture
(encoder-decoder network) without other aids. In this work we
discard the fully connected layers of the VGG16 encoder network
which enables us to train the network using the relevant training
set using SGD optimization. Another recent method [3] shows
the beneﬁt of reducing the number of parameters signiﬁcantly
without sacriﬁcing performance, reducing memory consumption
and improving inference time.
Our work was inspired by the unsupervised feature learning
architecture proposed by Ranzato et al. [19]. The key learning
module is an encoder-decoder network. An encoder consists of
convolution with a ﬁlter bank, element-wise tanh non-linearity,
max-pooling and sub-sampling to obtain the feature maps. For
each sample, the indices of the max locations computed during
pooling are stored and passed to the decoder. The decoder up-
samples the feature maps by using the stored pooled indices. It
convolves this upsampled map using a trainable decoder ﬁlter
bank to reconstruct the input image. This architecture was used for
unsupervised pre-training for classiﬁcation. A somewhat similar
decoding technique is used for visualizing trained convolutional
networks [47] for classiﬁcation. The architecture of Ranzato et al.
mainly focused on layer-wise feature learning using small input
patches. This was extended by Kavukcuoglu et. al. [48] to accept
full image sizes as input to learn hierarchical encoders. Both these
approaches however did not attempt to use deep encoder-decoder
networks for unsupervised feature training as they discarded the
decoders after each encoder training. Here, SegNet differs from
these architectures as the deep encoder-decoder network is trained
jointly for a supervised learning task and hence the decoders are
an integral part of the network in test time.
Other applications where pixel wise predictions are made
using deep networks are image super-resolution [49] and depth
map prediction from a single image [50]. The authors in [50]
discuss the need for learning to upsample from low resolution
feature maps which is the central topic of this paper.3 A RCHITECTURE
SegNet has an encoder network and a corresponding decoder
network, followed by a ﬁnal pixelwise classiﬁcation layer. This
architecture is illustrated in Fig. 3. The encoder network consists
of 13 convolutional layers which correspond to the ﬁrst 13
convolutional layers in the VGG16 network [1] designed for object
classiﬁcation. We can therefore initialize the training process from
weights trained for classiﬁcation on large datasets [41]. We can
also discard the fully connected layers in favour of retaining
higher resolution feature maps at the deepest encoder output. This
also reduces the number of parameters in the SegNet encoder
network signiﬁcantly (from 134M to 14.7M) as compared to other
recent architectures [2], [4] (see. Table 6). Each encoder layer
has a corresponding decoder layer and hence the decoder network
has 13 layers. The ﬁnal decoder output is fed to a multi-class
soft-max classiﬁer to produce class probabilities for each pixel
independently.
Each encoder in the encoder network performs convolution
with a ﬁlter bank to produce a set of feature maps. These are
then batch normalized [51], [52]). Then an element-wise rectiﬁed-
linear non-linearity (ReLU) max(0; x )is applied. Following that,
max-pooling with a 22window and stride 2(non-overlapping
window) is performed and the resulting output is sub-sampled by
a factor of 2. Max-pooling is used to achieve translation invariance
over small spatial shifts in the input image. Sub-sampling results
in a large input image context (spatial window) for each pixel
in the feature map. While several layers of max-pooling and
sub-sampling can achieve more translation invariance for robust
classiﬁcation correspondingly there is a loss of spatial resolution
of the feature maps. The increasingly lossy (boundary detail)
image representation is not beneﬁcial for segmentation where
boundary delineation is vital. Therefore, it is necessary to capture
and store boundary information in the encoder feature maps
before sub-sampling is performed. If memory during inference
is not constrained, then all the encoder feature maps (after sub-
sampling) can be stored. This is usually not the case in practical
applications and hence we propose a more efﬁcient way to store
this information. It involves storing only the max-pooling indices,
i.e, the locations of the maximum feature value in each pooling
window is memorized for each encoder feature map. In principle,
this can be done using 2 bits for each 22pooling window and
is thus much more efﬁcient to store as compared to memorizing
feature map(s) in ﬂoat precision. As we show later in this work,0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
5
this lower memory storage results in a slight loss of accuracy but
is still suitable for practical applications.
The appropriate decoder in the decoder network upsamples
its input feature map(s) using the memorized max-pooling indices
from the corresponding encoder feature map(s). This step pro-
duces sparse feature map(s). This SegNet decoding technique is
illustrated in Fig. 3. These feature maps are then convolved with
a trainable decoder ﬁlter bank to produce dense feature maps.
A batch normalization step is then applied to each of these maps.
Note that the decoder corresponding to the ﬁrst encoder (closest to
the input image) produces a multi-channel feature map, although
its encoder input has 3 channels (RGB). This is unlike the other
decoders in the network which produce feature maps with the
same number of size and channels as their encoder inputs. The
high dimensional feature representation at the output of the ﬁnal
decoder is fed to a trainable soft-max classiﬁer. This soft-max
classiﬁes each pixel independently. The output of the soft-max
classiﬁer is a K channel image of probabilities where K is the
number of classes. The predicted segmentation corresponds to the
class with maximum probability at each pixel.
We add here that two other architectures, DeconvNet [53] and
U-Net [16] share a similar architecture to SegNet but with some
differences. DeconvNet has a much larger parameterization, needs
more computational resources and is harder to train end-to-end
(Table 6), primarily due to the use of fully connected layers (albeit
in a convolutional manner) We report several comparisons with
DeconvNet later in the paper Sec. 4.
As compared to SegNet, U-Net [16] (proposed for the medical
imaging community) does not reuse pooling indices but instead
transfers the entire feature map (at the cost of more memory) to
the corresponding decoders and concatenates them to upsampled
(via deconvolution) decoder feature maps. There is no conv5 and
max-pool 5 block in U-Net as in the VGG net architecture. SegNet,
on the other hand, uses all of the pre-trained convolutional layer
weights from VGG net as pre-trained weights.
3.1 Decoder Variants
Many segmentation architectures [2], [3], [4] share the same
encoder network and they only vary in the form of their decoder
network. Of these we choose to compare the SegNet decoding
technique with the widely used Fully Convolutional Network
(FCN) decoding technique [2], [10].
In order to analyse SegNet and compare its performance with
FCN (decoder variants) we use a smaller version of SegNet,
termed SegNet-Basic1, which has 4 encoders and 4 decoders.
All the encoders in SegNet-Basic perform max-pooling and sub-
sampling and the corresponding decoders upsample its input using
the received max-pooling indices. Batch normalization is used
after each convolutional layer in both the encoder and decoder
network. No biases are used after convolutions and no ReLU non-
linearity is present in the decoder network. Further, a constant
kernel size of 77over all the encoder and decoder layers is
chosen to provide a wide context for smooth labelling i.e. a pixel
in the deepest layer feature map (layer 4) can be traced back to a
context window in the input image of 106106 pixels. This small
size of SegNet-Basic allows us to explore many different variants
(decoders) and train them in reasonable time. Similarly we create
FCN-Basic, a comparable version of FCN for our analysis which
1. SegNet-Basic was earlier termed SegNet in a archival version of this paper
[12]shares the same encoder network as SegNet-Basic but with the
FCN decoding technique (see Fig. 3) used in all its decoders.
On the left in Fig. 3 is the decoding technique used by SegNet
(also SegNet-Basic), where there is no learning involved in the
upsampling step. However, the upsampled maps are convolved
with trainable multi-channel decoder ﬁlters to densify its sparse
inputs. Each decoder ﬁlter has the same number of channels as
the number of upsampled feature maps. A smaller variant is one
where the decoder ﬁlters are single channel, i.e they only convolve
their corresponding upsampled feature map. This variant (SegNet-
Basic-SingleChannelDecoder) reduces the number of trainable
parameters and inference time signiﬁcantly.
On the right in Fig. 3 is the FCN (also FCN-Basic) decoding
technique. The important design element of the FCN model is
dimensionality reduction step of the encoder feature maps. This
compresses the encoder feature maps which are then used in the
corresponding decoders. Dimensionality reduction of the encoder
feature maps, say of 64 channels, is performed by convolving them
with 1164K trainable ﬁlters, where K is the number of
classes. The compressed K channel ﬁnal encoder layer feature
maps are the input to the decoder network. In a decoder of this
network, upsampling is performed by inverse convolution using
a ﬁxed or trainable multi-channel upsampling kernel. We set the
kernel size to 88. This manner of upsampling is also termed as
deconvolution. Note that, in comparison, SegNet the multi-channel
convolution using trainable decoder ﬁlters is performed after
upsampling to densifying feature maps. The upsampled feature
map in FCN has K channels. It is then added element-wise to
the corresponding resolution encoder feature map to produce the
output decoder feature map. The upsampling kernels are initialized
using bilinear interpolation weights [2].
The FCN decoder model requires storing encoder feature maps
during inference. This can be memory intensive for embedded
applications; for e.g. storing 64 feature maps of the ﬁrst layer of
FCN-Basic at 180240 resolution in 32 bit ﬂoating point preci-
sion takes 11MB. This can be made smaller using dimensionality
reduction to the 11 feature maps which requires 1.9MB storage.
SegNet on the other hand requires almost negligible storage cost
for the pooling indices (:17MB if stored using 2 bits per 22
pooling window). We can also create a variant of the FCN-Basic
model which discards the encoder feature map addition step and
only learns the upsampling kernels (FCN-Basic-NoAddition).
In addition to the above variants, we study upsampling using
ﬁxed bilinear interpolation weights which therefore requires no
learning for upsampling (Bilinear-Interpolation). At the other
extreme, we can add 64 encoder feature maps at each layer to
the corresponding output feature maps from the SegNet decoder to
create a more memory intensive variant of SegNet (SegNet-Basic-
EncoderAddition). Here both the pooling indices for upsampling
are used, followed by a convolution step to densify its sparse input.
This is then added element-wise to the corresponding encoder
feature maps to produce a decoders output.
Another and more memory intensive FCN-Basic variant
(FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction) is where there is no dimension-
ality reduction performed for the encoder feature maps. This
implies that unlike FCN-Basic the ﬁnal encoder feature map is
not compressed to K channels before passing it to the decoder
network. Therefore, the number of channels at the end of each
decoder is the same as the corresponding encoder (i.e 64).
We also tried other generic variants where feature maps are
simply upsampled by replication [7], or by using a ﬁxed (and0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
6
𝑎 𝑏 
𝑐 𝑑 𝑎 0 
0 0 0 0 
0 
𝑑 
0 0 0 𝑏 
0 
0 0 𝑐 
Max -pooling 
Indices  
 SegNet   Deconvolution  
for upsampling  
Encoder feature map  + 
𝑦1 
 𝑦3 
 𝑦2 
 𝑦4 
 𝑦5 
 𝑦8 
 𝑦6 
 𝑦7 
 
𝑦13 
 𝑦14 
 𝑦15 
 𝑦16 
 
 FCN  𝑦12 
 𝑦10 
 𝑦11 
 𝑦9 
 
𝑎 𝑏 
𝑐 𝑑 𝑥1 
 𝑥3 
 𝑥2 
 𝑥4 
 𝑥5 
 𝑥8 
 𝑥6 
 𝑥7 
 𝑥12 
 𝑥9 
 𝑥10 
 𝑥11 
 𝑥14 
 𝑥13 
 𝑥15 
 𝑥16 
 Convolution with trainable decoder filters  
Dimensionality reduction  
Fig. 3. An illustration of SegNet and FCN [2] decoders. a; b; c; d correspond to values in a feature map. SegNet uses the max pooling indices
to upsample (without learning) the feature map(s) and convolves with a trainable decoder ﬁlter bank. FCN upsamples by learning to deconvolve
the input feature map and adds the corresponding encoder feature map to produce the decoder output. This feature map is the output of the
max-pooling layer (includes sub-sampling) in the corresponding encoder. Note that there are no trainable decoder ﬁlters in FCN.
Median frequency balancing Natural frequency balancing
Storage Infer Test Train Test Train
Variant Params (M) multiplier time (ms) G C mIoU BF G C mIoU G C mIoU BF G C mIoU
Fixed upsampling
Bilinear-Interpolation 0.625 0 24.2 77.9 61.1 43.3 20.83 89.1 90.2 82.7 82.7 52.5 43.8 23.08 93.5 74.1 59.9
Upsampling using max-pooling indices
SegNet-Basic 1.425 1 52.6 82.7 62.0 47.7 35.78 94.7 96. 2 92.7 84.0 54.6 46.3 36.67 96.1 83.9 73.3
SegNet-Basic-EncoderAddition 1.425 64 53.0 83.4 63.6 48.5 35.92 94.3 95.8 92.0 84.2 56.5 47.7 36.27 95.3 80.9 68.9
SegNet-Basic-SingleChannelDecoder 0.625 1 33.1 81.2 60.7 46.1 31.62 93.2 94.8 90.3 83.5 53.9 45.2 32.45 92.6 68.4 52.8
Learning to upsample (bilinear initialisation)
FCN-Basic 0.65 11 24.2 81.7 62.4 47.3 38.11 92.8 93.6 88.1 83.9 55.6 45.0 37.33 92.0 66.8 50.7
FCN-Basic-NoAddition 0.65 n/a 23.8 80.5 58.6 44.1 31.96 92.5 93.0 87.2 82.3 53.9 44.2 29.43 93.1 72.8 57.6
FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction 1.625 64 44.8 84.1 63.4 50.1 37.37 95.1 96.5 93.2 83.5 57.3 47.0 37.13 97.2 91.7 84.8
FCN-Basic-NoAddition-NoDimReduction 1.625 0 43.9 80.5 61.6 45.9 30.47 92.5 94.6 89.9 83.7 54.8 45.5 33.17 95.0 80.2 67.8
TABLE 1
Comparison of decoder variants. We quantify the performance using global (G), class average (C), mean of intersection over union (mIoU) and a
semantic contour measure (BF). The testing and training accuracies are shown as percentages for both natural frequency and median frequency
balanced training loss function. SegNet-Basic performs at the same level as FCN-Basic but requires only storing max-pooling indices and is
therefore more memory efﬁcient during inference. Note that the theoretical memory requirement reported is based only on the size of the ﬁrst layer
encoder feature map. FCN-Basic, SegNet-Basic, SegNet-Basic-EncoderAddition all have high BF scores indicating the need to use information in
encoder feature maps for better class contour delineation. Networks with larger decoders and those using the encoder feature maps in full perform
best, although they are least efﬁcient in terms of inference time and memory.
sparse) array of indices for upsampling. These performed quite
poorly in comparison to the above variants. A variant without
max-pooling and sub-sampling in the encoder network (decoders
are redundant) consumes more memory, takes longer to converge
and performs poorly. Finally, please note that to encourage repro-
duction of our results we release the Caffe implementation of all
the variants2.
3.2 Training
We use the CamVid road scenes dataset to benchmark the perfor-
mance of the decoder variants. This dataset is small, consisting of
367 training and 233 testing RGB images (day and dusk scenes) at
360480 resolution. The challenge is to segment 11 classes such
as road, building, cars, pedestrians, signs, poles, side-walk etc. We
perform local contrast normalization [54] to the RGB input.
The encoder and decoder weights were all initialized using the
technique described in He et al. [55]. To train all the variants we
use stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with a ﬁxed learning rate
of 0.1 and momentum of 0.9 [17] using our Caffe implementation
of SegNet-Basic [56]. We train the variants until the training loss
2. See http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/ for our SegNet code and web
demo.converges. Before each epoch, the training set is shufﬂed and each
mini-batch (12 images) is then picked in order thus ensuring that
each image is used only once in an epoch. We select the model
which performs highest on a validation dataset.
We use the cross-entropy loss [2] as the objective function for
training the network. The loss is summed up over all the pixels
in a mini-batch. When there is large variation in the number of
pixels in each class in the training set (e.g road, sky and building
pixels dominate the CamVid dataset) then there is a need to weight
the loss differently based on the true class. This is termed class
balancing. We use median frequency balancing [13] where the
weight assigned to a class in the loss function is the ratio of the
median of class frequencies computed on the entire training set
divided by the class frequency. This implies that larger classes in
the training set have a weight smaller than 1and the weights
of the smallest classes are the highest. We also experimented
with training the different variants without class balancing or
equivalently using natural frequency balancing.
3.3 Analysis
To compare the quantitative performance of the different decoder
variants, we use three commonly used performance measures:
global accuracy (G) which measures the percentage of pixels0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
7
correctly classiﬁed in the dataset, class average accuracy (C) is
the mean of the predictive accuracy over all classes and mean
intersection over union (mIoU) over all classes as used in the Pas-
cal VOC12 challenge [21]. The mIoU metric is a more stringent
metric than class average accuracy since it penalizes false positive
predictions. However, mIoU metric is not optimized for directly
through the class balanced cross-entropy loss.
The mIoU metric otherwise known as the Jacard Index is most
commonly used in benchmarking. However, Csurka et al. [57] note
that this metric does not always correspond to human qualitative
judgements (ranks) of good quality segmentation. They show with
examples that mIoU favours region smoothness and does not
evaluate boundary accuracy, a point also alluded to recently by the
authors of FCN [58]. Hence they propose to complement the mIoU
metric with a boundary measure based on the Berkeley contour
matching score commonly used to evaluate unsupervised image
segmentation quality [59]. Csurka et al. [57] simply extend this
to semantic segmentation and show that the measure of semantic
contour accuracy used in conjunction with the mIoU metric agrees
more with human ranking of segmentation outputs.
The key idea in computing a semantic contour score is to eval-
uate the F1-measure [59] which involves computing the precision
and recall values between the predicted and ground truth class
boundary given a pixel tolerance distance. We used a value of
0:75% of the image diagonal as the tolerance distance. The F1-
measure for each class that is present in the ground truth test image
is averaged to produce an image F1-measure. Then we compute
the whole test set average, denoted the boundary F1-measure (BF)
by average the image F1 measures.
We test each architectural variant after each 1000 iterations of
optimization on the CamVid validation set until the training loss
converges. With a training mini-batch size of 12 this corresponds
to testing approximately every 33 epochs (passes) through the
training set. We select the iteration wherein the global accuracy
is highest amongst the evaluations on the validation set. We report
all the three measures of performance at this point on the held-out
CamVid test set. Although we use class balancing while training
the variants, it is still important to achieve high global accuracy to
result in an overall smooth segmentation. Another reason is that
the contribution of segmentation towards autonomous driving is
mainly for delineating classes such as roads, buildings, side-walk,
sky. These classes dominate the majority of the pixels in an image
and a high global accuracy corresponds to good segmentation
of these important classes. We also observed that reporting the
numerical performance when class average is highest can often
correspond to low global accuracy indicating a perceptually noisy
segmentation output.
In Table 1 we report the numerical results of our analysis.
We also show the size of the trainable parameters and the highest
resolution feature map or pooling indices storage memory, i.e, of
the ﬁrst layer feature maps after max-pooling and sub-sampling.
We show the average time for one forward pass with our Caffe
implementation, averaged over 50 measurements using a 360
480 input on an NVIDIA Titan GPU with cuDNN v3 acceleration.
We note that the upsampling layers in the SegNet variants are
not optimised using cuDNN acceleration. We show the results
for both testing and training for all the variants at the selected
iteration. The results are also tabulated without class balancing
(natural frequency) for training and testing accuracies. Below we
analyse the results with class balancing.
From the Table 1, we see that bilinear interpolation basedupsampling without any learning performs the worst based on
all the measures of accuracy. All the other methods which either
use learning for upsampling (FCN-Basic and variants) or learning
decoder ﬁlters after upsampling (SegNet-Basic and its variants)
perform signiﬁcantly better. This emphasizes the need to learn
decoders for segmentation. This is also supported by experimental
evidence gathered by other authors when comparing FCN with
SegNet-type decoding techniques [4].
When we compare SegNet-Basic and FCN-Basic we see that
both perform equally well on this test over all the measures of
accuracy. The difference is that SegNet uses less memory during
inference since it only stores max-pooling indices. On the other
hand FCN-Basic stores encoder feature maps in full which con-
sumes much more memory (11 times more). SegNet-Basic has a
decoder with 64 feature maps in each decoder layer. In comparison
FCN-Basic, which uses dimensionality reduction, has fewer (11)
feature maps in each decoder layer. This reduces the number of
convolutions in the decoder network and hence FCN-Basic is
faster during inference (forward pass). From another perspective,
the decoder network in SegNet-Basic makes it overall a larger
network than FCN-Basic. This endows it with more ﬂexibility
and hence achieves higher training accuracy than FCN-Basic for
the same number of iterations. Overall we see that SegNet-Basic
has an advantage over FCN-Basic when inference time memory
is constrained but where inference time can be compromised to
some extent.
SegNet-Basic is most similar to FCN-Basic-NoAddition in
terms of their decoders, although the decoder of SegNet is larger.
Both learn to produce dense feature maps, either directly by
learning to perform deconvolution as in FCN-Basic-NoAddition
or by ﬁrst upsampling and then convolving with trained decoder
ﬁlters. The performance of SegNet-Basic is superior, in part due
to its larger decoder size. The accuracy of FCN-Basic-NoAddition
is also lower as compared to FCN-Basic. This shows that it is vital
to capture the information present in the encoder feature maps
for better performance. In particular, note the large drop in the
BF measure between these two variants. This can also explain
the part of the reason why SegNet-Basic outperforms FCN-Basic-
NoAddition.
The size of the FCN-Basic-NoAddition-NoDimReduction
model is slightly larger than SegNet-Basic since the ﬁnal encoder
feature maps are not compressed to match the number of classes
K. This makes it a fair comparison in terms of the size of
the model. The performance of this FCN variant is poorer than
SegNet-Basic in test but also its training accuracy is lower for the
same number of training epochs. This shows that using a larger
decoder is not enough but it is also important to capture encoder
feature map information to learn better, particular the ﬁne grained
contour information (notice the drop in the BF measure). Here
it is also interesting to see that SegNet-Basic has a competitive
training accuracy when compared to larger models such FCN-
Basic-NoDimReduction.
Another interesting comparison between FCN-Basic-
NoAddition and SegNet-Basic-SingleChannelDecoder shows that
using max-pooling indices for upsampling and an overall larger
decoder leads to better performance. This also lends evidence to
SegNet being a good architecture for segmentation, particularly
when there is a need to ﬁnd a compromise between storage
cost, accuracy versus inference time. In the best case, when both
memory and inference time is not constrained, larger models such
as FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction and SegNet-EncoderAddition are0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
8
both more accurate than the other variants. Particularly, discarding
dimensionality reduction in the FCN-Basic model leads to the
best performance amongst the FCN-Basic variants with a high BF
score. This once again emphasizes the trade-off involved between
memory and accuracy in segmentation architectures.
The last two columns of Table 1 show the result when
no class balancing is used (natural frequency). Here, we can
observe that without weighting the results are poorer for all
the variants, particularly for class average accuracy and mIoU
metric. The global accuracy is the highest without weighting
since the majority of the scene is dominated by sky, road and
building pixels. Apart from this all the inference from the com-
parative analysis of variants holds true for natural frequency
balancing too, including the trends for the BF measure. SegNet-
Basic performs as well as FCN-Basic and is better than the
larger FCN-Basic-NoAddition-NoDimReduction. The bigger but
less efﬁcient models FCN-Basic-NoDimReduction and SegNet-
EncoderAddition perform better than the other variants.
We can now summarize the above analysis with the following
general points.
1) The best performance is achieved when encoder feature
maps are stored in full. This is reﬂected in the semantic
contour delineation metric (BF) most clearly.
2) When memory during inference is constrained, then com-
pressed forms of encoder feature maps (dimensionality
reduction, max-pooling indices) can be stored and used
with an appropriate decoder (e.g. SegNet type) to improve
performance.
3) Larger decoders increase performance for a given encoder
network.
4 B ENCHMARKING
We quantify the performance of SegNet on two scene segmenta-
tion benchmarks using our Caffe implementation3. The ﬁrst task
is road scene segmentation which is of current practical interest
for various autonomous driving related problems. The second
task is indoor scene segmentation which is of immediate interest
to several augmented reality (AR) applications. The input RGB
images for both tasks were 360480.
We benchmarked SegNet against several other well adopted
deep architectures for segmentation such as FCN [2], DeepLab-
LargFOV [3] and DeconvNet [4]. Our objective was to understand
the performance of these architectures when trained end-to-end
on the same datasets. To enable end-to-end training we added
batch normalization [51] layers after each convolutional layer. For
DeepLab-LargeFOV , we changed the max pooling 3 stride to 1 to
achieve a ﬁnal predictive resolution of 4560. We restricted the
feature size in the fully connnected layers of DeconvNet to 1024
so as to enable training with the same batch size as other models.
Here note that the authors of DeepLab-LargeFOV [3] have also
reported little loss in performance by reducing the size of the fully
connected layers.
In order to perform a controlled benchmark we used the same
SGD solver [17] with a ﬁxed learning rate of 10 3and momentum
of 0:9. The optimization was performed for more than 100
epochs through the dataset until no further performance increase
was observed. Dropout of 0:5 was added to the end of deeper
3. Our web demo and Caffe implementation is available for evaluation at
http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/convolutional layers in all models to prevent overﬁtting (see
http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/tutorial.html for example
caffe prototxt). For the road scenes which have 11 classes we
used a mini-batch size of 5and for indoor scenes with 37 classes
we used a mini-batch size of 4.
4.1 Road Scene Segmentation
A number of road scene datasets are available for semantic parsing
[22], [26], [60], [61]. Of these we choose to benchmark SegNet
using the CamVid dataset [22] as it contains video sequences. This
enables us to compare our proposed architecture with those which
use motion and structure [28], [29], [30] and video segments [33].
We also combine [22], [26], [60], [61] to form an ensemble of
3433 images to train SegNet for an additional benchmark. For a
web demo (see footnote 3) of road scene segmentation, we include
the CamVid test set to this larger dataset. Here, we would like to
note that another recent and independent segmentation benchmark
on road scenes has been performed for SegNet and the other
competing architectures used in this paper [62]. However, the
benchmark was not controlled, meaning that each architecture was
trained with a separate recipe with varying input resolutions and
sometimes with a validation set included. Therefore, we believe
our more controlled benchmark can be used to complement their
efforts.
The qualitative comparisons of SegNet predictions with other
deep architectures can be seen in Fig. 4. The qualitative results
show the ability of the proposed architecture to segment smaller
classes in road scenes while producing a smooth segmentation of
the overall scene. Indeed, under the controlled benchmark setting,
SegNet shows superior performance as compared to some of the
larger models. DeepLab-LargeFOV is the most efﬁcient model
and with CRF post-processing can produce competitive results
although smaller classes are lost. FCN with learnt deconvolution
is clearly better than with ﬁxed bilinear upsampling. DeconvNet is
the largest model and the most inefﬁcient to train. Its predictions
do not retain small classes.
We also use this benchmark to ﬁrst compare SegNet with sev-
eral non deep-learning methods including Random Forests [27],
Boosting [27], [29] in combination with CRF based methods [30].
This was done to give the user a perspective of the improvements
in accuracy that has been achieved using deep networks compared
to classical feature engineering based techniques.
The results in Table 2 show SegNet-Basic, SegNet obtain
competitive results when compared with methods which use
CRFs. This shows the ability of the deep architecture to extract
meaningful features from the input image and map it to accurate
and smooth class segment labels. The most interesting result
here is the large performance improvement in class average and
mIOU metrics that is obtained when a large training dataset,
obtained by combining [22], [26], [60], [61], is used to train
SegNet. Correspondingly, the qualitative results of SegNet (see
Fig. 4) are clearly superior to the rest of the methods. It is able
to segment both small and large classes well. We remark here
that we used median frequency class balancing [50] in training
SegNet-Basic and SegNet. In addition, there is an overall smooth
quality of segmentation much like what is typically obtained with
CRF post-processing. Although the fact that results improve with
larger training sets is not surprising, the percentage improvement
obtained using pre-trained encoder network and this training set
indicates that this architecture can potentially be deployed for0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
9
practical applications. Our random testing on urban and highway
images from the internet (see Fig. 1) demonstrates that SegNet can
absorb a large training set and generalize well to unseen images. It
also indicates the contribution of the prior (CRF) can be lessened
when sufﬁcient amount of training data is made available.
In Table 3 we compare SegNet’s performance with now widely
adopted fully convolutional architectures for segmentation. As
compared to the experiment in Table 2, we did not use any
class blancing for training any of the deep architectures including
SegNet. This is because we found it difﬁcult to train larger
models such as DeconvNet with median frequency balancing. We
benchmark performance at 40K, 80K and >80K iterations which
given the mini-batch size and training set size approximately
corresponds to 50; 100 and >100 epochs. For the last test point
we also report the maximum number of iterations (here atleast 150
epochs) beyond which we observed no accuracy improvements or
when over-ﬁtting set in. We report the metrics at three stages
in the training phase to reveal how the metrics varied with
training time, particularly for larger networks. This is important
to understand if additional training time is justiﬁed when set
against accuracy increases. Note also that for each evaluation
we performed a complete run through the dataset to obtain
batch norm statistics and then evaluated the test model with this
statistic (see http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk/projects/segnet/tutorial.html
for code.). These evaluations are expensive to perform on large
training sets and hence we only report metrics at three time points
in the training phase.
From Table 3 we immediately see that SegNet, DeconvNet
achieve the highest scores in all the metrics as compared to other
models. DeconvNet has a higher boundary delineation accuracy
but SegNet is much more efﬁcient as compared to DeconvNet.
This can be seen from the compute statistics in Table 6. FCN,
DeconvNet which have fully connected layers (turned into con-
volutional layers) train much more slowly and have comparable
or higher forward-backward pass time with reference to SegNet.
Here we note also that over-ﬁtting was not an issue in training
these larger models, since at comparable iterations to SegNet their
metrics showed an increasing trend.
For the FCN model learning the deconvolutional layers as
opposed to ﬁxing them with bi-linear interpolation weights im-
proves performance particularly the BF score. It also achieves
higher metrics in a far lesser time. This fact agrees with our earlier
analysis in Sec. 3.3.
Surprisingly, DeepLab-LargeFOV which is trained to predict
labels at a resolution of 4560 produces competitive performance
given that it is the smallest model in terms of parameterization
and also has the fastest training time as per Table 6. However,
the boundary accuracy is poorer and this is shared by the other
architectures. DeconvNet’s BF score is higher than the other
networks when trained for a very long time. Given our analysis
in Sec. 3.3 and the fact that it shares a SegNet type architecture.
The impact of dense CRF [63] post-processing can be seen in
the last time point for DeepLab-LargeFOV-denseCRF. Both global
and mIoU improve but class average diminshes. However a large
improvement is obtained for the BF score. Note here that the dense
CRF hyperparameters were obtained by an expensive grid-search
process on a subset of the training set since no validation set was
available.4.2 SUN RGB-D Indoor Scenes
SUN RGB-D [23] is a very challenging and large dataset of indoor
scenes with 5285 training and 5050 testing images. The images
are captured by different sensors and hence come in various reso-
lutions. The task is to segment 37 indoor scene classes including
wall, ﬂoor, ceiling, table, chair, sofa etc. This task is made hard
by the fact that object classes come in various shapes, sizes and in
different poses. There are frequent partial occlusions since there
are typically many different classes present in each of the test
images. These factors make this one of the hardest segmentation
challenges. We only use the RGB modality for our training and
testing. Using the depth modality would necessitate architectural
modiﬁcations/redesign [2]. Also the quality of depth images from
current cameras require careful post-processing to ﬁll-in missing
measurements. They may also require using fusion of many frames
to robustly extract features for segmentation. Therefore we believe
using depth for segmentation merits a separate body of work which
is not in the scope of this paper. We also note that an earlier
benchmark dataset NYUv2 [25] is included as part of this dataset.
Road scene images have limited variation, both in terms of the
classes of interest and their spatial arrangements. When captured
from a moving vehicle where the camera position is nearly always
parallel to the road surface limiting variability in view points. This
makes it easier for deep networks to learn to segment them ro-
bustly. In comparison, images of indoor scenes are more complex
since the view points can vary a lot and there is less regularity
in both the number of classes present in a scene and their spatial
arrangement. Another difﬁculty is caused by the widely varying
sizes of the object classes in the scene. Some test samples from the
recent SUN RGB-D dataset [23] are shown in Fig. 5. We observe
some scenes with few large classes and some others with dense
clutter (bottom row and right). The appearance (texture and shape)
can also widely vary in indoor scenes. Therefore, we believe this is
the hardest challenge for segmentation architectures and methods
in computer vision. Other challenges, such as Pascal VOC12 [21]
salient object segmentation have occupied researchers more [66],
but we believe indoor scene segmentation is more challenging and
has more current practical applications such as in AR and robotics.
To encourage more research in this direction we compared well
known deep architectures on the large SUN RGB-D dataset.
The qualitative results of SegNet on samples of indoor scenes
of different types such as bedroom, living room, laboratory,
meeting room, bathroom are shown in Fig. 5. We see that SegNet
obtains reasonable predictions when the size of the classes are
large under different view points. This is particularly interesting
since the input modality is only RGB. RGB images are also
useful to segment thinner structures such as the legs of chairs
and tables, lamps which is difﬁcult to achieve using depth images
from currently available sensors. This can be seen from the results
of SegNet, DeconvNet in Fig. 5. It is also useful to segment
decorative objects such as paintings on the wall for AR tasks.
However as compared to outdoor scenes the segmentation quality
is clearly more noisy. The quality drops signiﬁcantly when clutter
is increased (see the result sample in the middle column).
The quantitative results in Table 4 show that all the deep
architectures share low mIoU and boundary metrics. The global
and class averages (correlates well with mIou) are also small.
SegNet outperforms all other methods in terms of G,C, BF metrics
and has a slightly lower mIoU than DeepLab-LargeFOV . As a
stand alone experiment we trained SegNet with median frequency0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
10
Test	samples	Ground	Truth	SegNet
													
DeepLab-LargeFOV			DeepLab-LargeFOV-	
denseCRF	FCN	FCN	(learn	deconv)	DeconvNet
	
Fig. 4. Results on CamVid day and dusk test samples. SegNet shows superior performance, particularly with its ability to delineate boundaries, as
compared to some of the larger models when all are trained in a controlled setting. DeepLab-LargeFOV is the most efﬁcient model and with CRF
post-processing can produce competitive results although smaller classes are lost. FCN with learnt deconvolution is clearly better. DeconvNet is the
largest model with the longest training time, but its predictions loose small classes. Note that these results correspond to the model corresponding
to the highest mIoU accuracy in Table 3.
class balancing [67] and the metrics were higher (see Table 4)
and this agrees with our analysis in Sec. 3.3. Interestingly, using
the grid search based optimal hyperparameters for the dense-CRF
worsened all except the BF score metric for DeepLab-LargeFOV-
denseCRF. More optimal settings could perhaps be found but the
grid search process was too expensive given the large inference
time for dense-CRFs.
One reason for the overall poor performance is the large num-
ber of classes in this segmentation task, many of which occupy
a small part of the image and appear infrequently. The accuracies
reported in Table 5 clearly show that larger classes have reasonable
accuracy and smaller classes have lower accuracies. This can be
improved with larger sized datasets and class distribution aware
training techniques. Another reason for poor performance could
lie in the inability of these deep architectures (all are based on
the VGG architecture [6]) to large variability in indoor scenes .This conjecture on our part is based on the fact that the smallest
model DeepLab-LargeFOV produces the best accuracy in terms of
mIoU and in comparison, larger parameterizations in DeconvNet,
FCN did not improve perfomance even with much longer training
(DeconvNet). This suggests there could lie a common reason
for poor performance across all architectures. More controlled
datasets [68] are needed to verify this hypothesis.
5 D ISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
Deep learning models have often achieved increasing success due
to the availability of massive datasets and expanding model depth
and parameterisation. However, in practice factors like memory
and computational time during training and testing are important
factors to consider when choosing a model from a large bank
of models. Training time becomes an important consideration
particularly when the performance gain is not commensurate with0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
11
Method
Building T
reeSk
yCar Sign-Symbol Road Pedestrian Fence Column-Pole Side-w
alkBic
yclistClass
avg.Global
avg.mIoU BF
SfM+Appearance
[28]
46.2 61.9 89.7 68.6 42.9 89.5 53.6 46.6 0.7 60.5 22.5 53.0
69.1 n/a
Boosting
[29]
61.9 67.3 91.1 71.1 58.5 92.9 49.5 37.6 25.8 77.8 24.7 59.8
76.4 n/a
Dense
Depth Maps [32]
85.3 57.3 95.4 69.2 46.5 98.5 23.8 44.3 22.0 38.1 28.7 55.4
82.1 n/a
Structured
Random Forests [31]
n/a 51.4
72.5 n/a
Neural
Decision Forests [64]
n/a 56.1
82.1 n/a
Local
Label Descriptors [65]
80.7 61.5 88.8 16.4 n/a 98.0 1.09 0.05 4.13 12.4 0.07 36.3
73.6 n/a
Super
Parsing [33]
87.0 67.1 96.9 62.7 30.1 95.9 14.7 17.9 1.7 70.0 19.4 51.2
83.3 n/a
Se
gNet (3.5K dataset training - 140K)
89.6 83.4 96.1 87.7 52.7 96.4 62.2 53.45 32.1 93.3 36.5 71.20
90.40 60.10 46.84
CRF
based approaches
Boosting
+ pairwise CRF [29]
70.7 70.8 94.7 74.4 55.9 94.1 45.7 37.2 13.0 79.3 23.1 59.9
79.8 n/a
Boosting+Higher
order [29]
84.5 72.6 97.5 72.7 34.1 95.3 34.2 45.7 8.1 77.6 28.5 59.2
83.8 n/a
Boosting+Detectors+CRF
[30]
81.5 76.6 96.2 78.7 40.2 93.9 43.0 47.6 14.3 81.5 33.9 62.5
83.8 n/a
TABLE 2
Quantitative comparisons of SegNet with traditional methods on the CamVid 11 road class segmentation problem [22]. SegNet outperforms all the
other methods, including those using depth, video and/or CRF’s on the majority of classes. In comparison with the CRF based methods SegNet
predictions are more accurate in 8 out of the 11 classes. It also shows a good 10% improvement in class average accuracy when trained on a
large dataset of 3.5K images. Particularly noteworthy are the signiﬁcant improvements in accuracy for the smaller/thinner classes. * Note that we
could not access predictions for older methods for computing the mIoU, BF metrics.
Network/Iterations 40K 80K >80K Max iter
G C mIoU BF G C mIoU BF G C mIoU BF
SegNet 88.81 59.93 50.02 35.78 89.68 69.82 57.18 42.08 90.40 71.20 60.10 46.84 140K
DeepLab-LargeFOV [3] 85.95 60.41 50.18 26.25 87.76 62.57 53.34 32.04 88.20 62.53 53.88 32.77 140K
DeepLab-LargeFOV-denseCRF [3] not computed 89.71 60.67 54.74 40.79 140K
FCN 81.97 54.38 46.59 22.86 82.71 56.22 47.95 24.76 83.27 59.56 49.83 27.99 200K
FCN (learnt deconv) [2] 83.21 56.05 48.68 27.40 83.71 59.64 50.80 31.01 83.14 64.21 51.96 33.18 160K
DeconvNet [4] 85.26 46.40 39.69 27.36 85.19 54.08 43.74 29.33 89.58 70.24 59.77 52.23 260K
TABLE 3
Quantitative comparison of deep networks for semantic segmentation on the CamVid test set when trained on a corpus of 3433 road scenes
without class balancing. When end-to-end training is performed with the same and ﬁxed learning rate, smaller networks like SegNet learn to
perform better in a shorter time. The BF score which measures the accuracy of inter-class boundary delineation is signiﬁcantly higher for SegNet,
DeconvNet as compared to other competing models. DeconvNet matches the metrics for SegNet but at a much larger computational cost. Also
see Table 2 for individual class accuracies for SegNet.
Network/Iterations 80K 140K >140K Max iter
G C mIoU BF G C mIoU BF G C mIoU BF
SegNet 70.73 30.82 22.52 9.16 71.66 37.60 27.46 11.33 72.63 44.76 31.84 12.66 240K
DeepLab-LargeFOV [3] 70.70 41.75 30.67 7.28 71.16 42.71 31.29 7.57 71.90 42.21 32.08 8.26 240K
DeepLab-LargeFOV-denseCRF [3] not computed 66.96 33.06 24.13 9.41 240K
FCN (learnt deconv) [2] 67.31 34.32 24.05 7.88 68.04 37.2 26.33 9.0 68.18 38.41 27.39 9.68 200K
DeconvNet [4] 59.62 12.93 8.35 6.50 63.28 22.53 15.14 7.86 66.13 32.28 22.57 10.47 380K
TABLE 4
Quantitative comparison of deep architectures on the SUNRGB-D dataset when trained on a corpus of 5250 indoor scenes. Note that only the
RGB modality was used in these experiments. In this complex task with 37classes all the architectures perform poorly, particularly because of the
smaller sized classes and skew in the class distribution. DeepLab-Large FOV, the smallest and most efﬁcient model has a slightly higher mIoU but
SegNet has a better G,C,BF score. Also note that when SegNet was trained with median frequency class balancing it obtained 71.75, 44.85,
32.08, 14.06 (180K) as the metrics.
increased training time as shown in our experiments. Test time
memory and computational load are important to deploy models
on specialised embedded devices, for example, in AR applications.
From an overall efﬁciency viewpoint, we feel less attention has
been paid to smaller and more memory, time efﬁcient models for
real-time applications such as road scene understanding and AR.
This was the primary motivation behind the proposal of SegNet,
which is signiﬁcantly smaller and faster than other competing
architectures, but which we have shown to be efﬁcient for tasks
such as road scene understanding.
Segmentation challenges such as Pascal [21] and MS-COCO
[42] are object segmentation challenges wherein a few classes are
present in any test image. Scene segmentation is more challengingdue to the high variability of indoor scenes and a need to segment
a larger number of classes simultaneously. The task of outdoor and
indoor scene segmentation are also more practically oriented with
current applications such as autonomous driving, robotics and AR.
The metrics we chose to benchmark various deep segmentation
architectures like the boundary F1-measure (BF) was done to
complement the existing metrics which are more biased towards
region accuracies. It is clear from our experiments and other inde-
pendent benchmarks [62] that outdoor scene images captured from
a moving car are easier to segment and deep architectures perform
robustly. We hope our experiments will encourage researchers to
engage their attention towards the more challenging indoor scene
segmentation task.0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
12
Test	samples	Ground	Truth	SegNet
													
DeepLab-LargeFOV			DeepLab-LargeFOV-	
denseCRF	FCN	(learnt	deconv)	DeconvNet
	
Fig. 5. Qualitative assessment of SegNet predictions on RGB indoor test scenes from the recently released SUN RGB-D dataset [23]. In this hard
challenge, SegNet predictions delineate inter class boundaries well for object classes in a variety of scenes and their view-points. Overall rhe
segmentation quality is better when object classes are reasonably sized but is very noisy when the scene is more cluttered. Note that often parts of
an image of a scene do not have ground truth labels and these are shown in black colour. These parts are not masked in the corresponding deep
model predictions that are shown. Note that these results correspond to the model corresponding to the highest mIoU accuracy in Table 4.
An important choice we had to make when benchmarking
different deep architectures of varying parameterization was the
manner in which to train them. Many of these architectures have
used a host of supporting techniques and multi-stage training
recipes to arrive at high accuracies on datasets but this makes
it difﬁcult to gather evidence about their true performance under
time and memory constraints. Instead we chose to perform a
controlled benchmarking where we used batch normalization to
enable end-to-end training with the same solver (SGD). However,
we note that this approach cannot entirely disentangle the effects
of model versus solver (optimization) in achieving a particular
result. This is mainly due to the fact that training these networks
involves gradient back-propagation which is imperfect and the
optimization is a non-convex problem in extremely large di-
mensions. Acknowledging these shortcomings, our hope is that
this controlled analysis complements other benchmarks [62] and
reveals the practical trade-offs involved in different well knownarchitectures.
For the future, we would like to exploit our understanding of
segmentation architectures gathered from our analysis to design
more efﬁcient architectures for real-time applications. We are also
interested in estimating the model uncertainty for predictions from
deep segmentation architectures [69], [70].
6 C ONCLUSION
We presented SegNet, a deep convolutional network architecture
for semantic segmentation. The main motivation behind SegNet
was the need to design an efﬁcient architecture for road and indoor
scene understanding which is efﬁcient both in terms of memory
and computational time. We analysed SegNet and compared it
with other important variants to reveal the practical trade-offs
involved in designing architectures for segmentation, particularly
training time, memory versus accuracy. Those architectures which
store the encoder network feature maps in full perform best but0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
13
Wall Floor Cabinet Bed Chair Sofa Table Door Window Bookshelf Picture Counter Blinds
83.42 93.43 63.37 73.18 75.92 59.57 64.18 52.50 57.51 42.05 56.17 37.66 40.29
Desk Shelves Curtain Dresser Pillow Mirror Floor mat Clothes Ceiling Books Fridge TV Paper
11.92 11.45 66.56 52.73 43.80 26.30 0.00 34.31 74.11 53.77 29.85 33.76 22.73
Towel Shower curtain Box Whiteboard Person Night stand Toilet Sink Lamp Bathtub Bag
19.83 0.03 23.14 60.25 27.27 29.88 76.00 58.10 35.27 48.86 16.76
TABLE 5
Class average accuracies of SegNet predictions for the 37 indoor scene classes in the SUN RGB-D benchmark dataset. The performance
correlates well with size of the classes in indoor scenes. Note that class average accuracy has a strong correlation with mIoU metric.
Network Forward pass(ms) Backward pass(ms) GPU training memory (MB) GPU inference memory (MB) Model size (MB)
SegNet 422.50 488.71 6803 1052 117
DeepLab-LargeFOV [3] 110.06 160.73 5618 1993 83
FCN (learnt deconv) [2] 317.09 484.11 9735 1806 539
DeconvNet [4] 474.65 602.15 9731 1872 877
TABLE 6
A comparison of computational time and hardware resources required for various deep architectures. The caffe time command was used to
compute time requirement averaged over 10 iterations with mini batch size 1 and an image of 360480 resolution We used nvidia-smi unix
command to compute memory consumption. For training memory computation we used a mini-batch of size 4 and for inference memory the batch
size was 1. Model size was the size of the caffe models on disk. SegNet is most memory efﬁcient during inference model.
consume more memory during inference time. SegNet on the
other hand is more efﬁcient since it only stores the max-pooling
indices of the feature maps and uses them in its decoder network
to achieve good performance. On large and well known datasets
SegNet performs competitively, achieving high scores for road
scene understanding. End-to-end learning of deep segmentation
architectures is a harder challenge and we hope to see more
attention paid to this important problem.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[2] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for
semantic segmentation,” in CVPR, pp. 3431–3440, 2015.
[3] C. Liang-Chieh, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. Yuille,
“Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional nets and fully
connected crfs,” in ICLR, 2015.
[4] H. Noh, S. Hong, and B. Han, “Learning deconvolution network for
semantic segmentation,” in ICCV, pp. 1520–1528, 2015.
[5] C. Szegedy, W. Liu, Y . Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D. Anguelov, D. Erhan,
V . Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich, “Going deeper with convolutions,” in
CVPR, pp. 1–9, 2015.
[6] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition,” CoRR, vol. abs/1409.1556, 2014.
[7] C. Farabet, C. Couprie, L. Najman, and Y . LeCun, “Learning hierarchical
features for scene labeling,” IEEE PAMI, vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1915–1929,
2013.
[8] N. Hft, H. Schulz, and S. Behnke, “Fast semantic segmentation of rgb-d
scenes with gpu-accelerated deep neural networks,” in KI 2014: Advances
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (C. Lutz and M. Thielscher, eds.), vol. 8736 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 80–85, Springer International
Publishing, 2014.
[9] R. Socher, C. C. Lin, C. Manning, and A. Y . Ng, “Parsing natural scenes
and natural language with recursive neural networks,” in ICML, pp. 129–
136, 2011.
[10] S. Zheng, S. Jayasumana, B. Romera-Paredes, V . Vineet, Z. Su, D. Du,
C. Huang, and P. H. Torr, “Conditional random ﬁelds as recurrent neural
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, pp. 1529–1537, 2015.
[11] W. Liu, A. Rabinovich, and A. C. Berg, “Parsenet: Looking wider to see
better,” CoRR, vol. abs/1506.04579, 2015.
[12] V . Badrinarayanan, A. Handa, and R. Cipolla, “Segnet: A deep con-
volutional encoder-decoder architecture for robust semantic pixel-wise
labelling,” CoRR, vol. abs/1505.07293, 2015.
[13] D. Eigen and R. Fergus, “Predicting depth, surface normals and semantic
labels with a common multi-scale convolutional architecture,” in ICCV,
pp. 2650–2658, 2015.[14] G. Papandreou, L.-C. Chen, K. Murphy, and A. L. Yuille, “Weakly-and
semi-supervised learning of a dcnn for semantic image segmentation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02734, 2015.
[15] F. Yu and V . Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated convo-
lutions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122, 2015.
[16] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in MICCAI, pp. 234–241, Springer,
2015.
[17] L. Bottou, “Large-scale machine learning with stochastic gradient de-
scent,” in Proceedings of COMPSTAT’2010, pp. 177–186, Springer,
2010.
[18] S. Hong, H. Noh, and B. Han, “Decoupled deep neural network for semi-
supervised semantic segmentation,” in NIPS, pp. 1495–1503, 2015.
[19] M. Ranzato, F. J. Huang, Y . Boureau, and Y . LeCun, “Unsupervised
learning of invariant feature hierarchies with applications to object
recognition,” in CVPR, 2007.
[20] R. Mottaghi, X. Chen, X. Liu, N.-G. Cho, S.-W. Lee, S. Fidler, R. Ur-
tasun, et al., “The role of context for object detection and semantic
segmentation in the wild,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2014 IEEE Conference on, pp. 891–898, IEEE, 2014.
[21] M. Everingham, S. A. Eslami, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams, J. Winn,
and A. Zisserman, “The pascal visual object classes challenge: A ret-
rospective,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 111, no. 1,
pp. 98–136.
[22] G. Brostow, J. Fauqueur, and R. Cipolla, “Semantic object classes in
video: A high-deﬁnition ground truth database,” PRL, vol. 30(2), pp. 88–
97, 2009.
[23] S. Song, S. P. Lichtenberg, and J. Xiao, “Sun rgb-d: A rgb-d scene
understanding benchmark suite,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 567–576, 2015.
[24] C. L. Zitnick and P. Doll ´ar, “Edge boxes: Locating object proposals from
edges,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2014, pp. 391–405, Springer, 2014.
[25] N. Silberman, D. Hoiem, P. Kohli, and R. Fergus, “Indoor segmentation
and support inference from rgbd images,” in ECCV, pp. 746–760,
Springer, 2012.
[26] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous
driving? the KITTI vision benchmark suite,” in CVPR, pp. 3354–3361,
2012.
[27] J. Shotton, M. Johnson, and R. Cipolla, “Semantic texton forests for
image categorization and segmentation,” in CVPR, 2008.
[28] G. Brostow, J. Shotton, J., and R. Cipolla, “Segmentation and recognition
using structure from motion point clouds,” in ECCV , Marseille, 2008.
[29] P. Sturgess, K. Alahari, L. Ladicky, and P. H.S.Torr, “Combining appear-
ance and structure from motion features for road scene understanding,”
inBMVC, 2009.
[30] L. Ladicky, P. Sturgess, K. Alahari, C. Russell, and P. H. S. Torr, “What,
where and how many? combining object detectors and crfs,” in ECCV,
pp. 424–437, 2010.
[31] P. Kontschieder, S. R. Bulo, H. Bischof, and M. Pelillo, “Structured
class-labels in random forests for semantic image labelling,” in ICCV,
pp. 2190–2197, IEEE, 2011.0162-8828 (c) 2016 IEEE. Translations and content mining are permitted for academic research only. Personal use is also permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See
http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2644615, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
14
[32] C. Zhang, L. Wang, and R. Yang, “Semantic segmentation of urban
scenes using dense depth maps,” in ECCV, pp. 708–721, Springer, 2010.
[33] J. Tighe and S. Lazebnik, “Superparsing,” IJCV, vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 329–
349, 2013.
[34] X. Ren, L. Bo, and D. Fox, “Rgb-(d) scene labeling: Features and
algorithms,” in CVPR, pp. 2759–2766, IEEE, 2012.
[35] A. Hermans, G. Floros, and B. Leibe, “Dense 3D Semantic Mapping of
Indoor Scenes from RGB-D Images,” in ICRA, 2014.
[36] S. Gupta, P. Arbelaez, and J. Malik, “Perceptual organization and
recognition of indoor scenes from rgb-d images,” in CVPR, pp. 564–571,
IEEE, 2013.
[37] C. Farabet, C. Couprie, L. Najman, and Y . LeCun, “Scene parsing with
multiscale feature learning, purity trees, and optimal covers,” in ICML,
2012.
[38] D. Grangier, L. Bottou, and R. Collobert, “Deep convolutional networks
for scene parsing,” in ICML Workshop on Deep Learning, 2009.
[39] C. Gatta, A. Romero, and J. van de Weijer, “Unrolling loopy top-down
semantic feedback in convolutional deep networks,” in CVPR Workshop
on Deep Vision, 2014.
[40] P. Pinheiro and R. Collobert, “Recurrent convolutional neural networks
for scene labeling,” in ICML, pp. 82–90, 2014.
[41] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh, S. Ma, Z. Huang,
A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein, A. C. Berg, and L. Fei-Fei,
“ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge,” International
Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), pp. 1–42, April 2015.
[42] T.-Y . Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan,
P. Doll ´ar, and C. L. Zitnick, “Microsoft coco: Common objects in
context,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2014, pp. 740–755, Springer, 2014.
[43] A. G. Schwing and R. Urtasun, “Fully connected deep structured net-
works,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02351, 2015.
[44] G. Lin, C. Shen, I. Reid, et al., “Efﬁcient piecewise training of
deep structured models for semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.01013, 2015.
[45] B. Hariharan, P. Arbel ´aez, R. Girshick, and J. Malik, “Hypercolumns for
object segmentation and ﬁne-grained localization,” in CVPR, pp. 447–
456, 2015.
[46] M. Mostajabi, P. Yadollahpour, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Feedforward se-
mantic segmentation with zoom-out features,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3376–3385,
2015.
[47] M. D. Zeiler, D. Krishnan, G. W. Taylor, and R. Fergus, “Deconvolutional
networks,” in CVPR, pp. 2528–2535, IEEE, 2010.
[48] K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Sermanet, Y . Boureau, K. Gregor, M. Mathieu,
and Y . LeCun, “Learning convolutional feature hierarchies for visual
recognition,” in NIPS, pp. 1090–1098, 2010.
[49] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang, “Learning a deep convolutional
network for image super-resolution,” in ECCV, pp. 184–199, Springer,
2014.
[50] D. Eigen, C. Puhrsch, and R. Fergus, “Depth map prediction from a single
image using a multi-scale deep network,” in NIPS, pp. 2366–2374, 2014.
[51] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” CoRR,
vol. abs/1502.03167, 2015.
[52] V . Badrinarayanan, B. Mishra, and R. Cipolla, “Understanding symme-
tries in deep networks,”
[53] H. Noh, S. Hong, and B. Han, “Learning deconvolution network for
semantic segmentation,” CoRR, vol. abs/1505.04366, 2015.
[54] K. Jarrett, K. Kavukcuoglu, M. Ranzato, and Y . LeCun, “What is the
best multi-stage architecture for object recognition?,” in ICCV, pp. 2146–
2153, 2009.
[55] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Delving deep into rectiﬁers:
Surpassing human-level performance on imagenet classiﬁcation,” in
ICCV, pp. 1026–1034, 2015.
[56] Y . Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick,
S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell, “Caffe: Convolutional architecture for
fast feature embedding,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international
conference on Multimedia, pp. 675–678, ACM, 2014.
[57] G. Csurka, D. Larlus, F. Perronnin, and F. Meylan, “What is a good
evaluation measure for semantic segmentation?.,” in BMVC, 2013.
[58] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for
semantic segmentation,” in https://arxiv.org/pdf/1605.06211v1.pdf, 2016.
[59] D. R. Martin, C. C. Fowlkes, and J. Malik, “Learning to detect natural
image boundaries using local brightness, color, and texture cues,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 26, no. 5,
pp. 530–549, 2004.
[60] S. Gould, R. Fulton, and D. Koller, “Decomposing a scene into geometric
and semantically consistent regions,” in ICCV, pp. 1–8, IEEE, 2009.[61] B. C. Russell, A. Torralba, K. P. Murphy, and W. T. Freeman, “Labelme:
a database and web-based tool for image annotation,” IJCV, vol. 77,
no. 1-3, pp. 157–173, 2008.
[62] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Benenson,
U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele, “The cityscapes dataset for semantic
urban scene understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.01685, 2016.
[63] V . Koltun, “Efﬁcient inference in fully connected crfs with gaussian edge
potentials,” in In: NIPS (2011, 2011.
[64] Bulo, S. Rota, and P. Kontschieder, “Neural decision forests for semantic
image labelling.,” in CVPR, 2014.
[65] Y . Yang, Z. Li, L. Zhang, C. Murphy, J. Ver Hoeve, and H. Jiang, “Local
label descriptor for example based semantic image labeling,” in ECCV,
pp. 361–375, Springer, 2012.
[66] Z. Liu, X. Li, P. Luo, C.-C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Semantic image
segmentation via deep parsing network,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1377–1385, 2015.
[67] D. Eigen and R. Fergus, “Predicting depth, surface normals and semantic
labels with a common multi-scale convolutional architecture,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1411.4734, 2014.
[68] A. Handa, V . Patraucean, V . Badrinarayanan, S. Stent, and R. Cipolla,
“Scenenet: Understanding real world indoor scenes with synthetic data,”
inCVPR, 2016.
[69] Y . Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a bayesian approximation:
Insights and applications,” in Deep Learning Workshop, ICML, 2015.
[70] A. Kendall, V . Badrinarayanan, and R. Cipolla, “Bayesian segnet: Model
uncertainty in deep convolutional encoder-decoder architectures for scene
understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02680, 2015.
Vijay Badrinarayanan obtained his Ph.D from
INRIA Rennes, France in 2009. He was a se-
nior post-doctoral research associate at the Ma-
chine Intelligence Laboratory, Department of En-
gineering, University of Cambridge, U.K. He
currently works as a Principal Engineer, Deep
Learning at Magic Leap, Inc. in Mountain View,
CA. His research interests are in probabilistic
graphical models, deep learning applied to im-
age and video based perception problems.
Alex Kendall graduated with a Bachelor of En-
gineering with First Class Honours in 2013 from
the University of Auckland, New Zealand. In
2014 he was awarded a Woolf Fisher Scholar-
ship to study towards a Ph.D at the University
of Cambridge, U.K. He is a member of the Ma-
chine Intelligence Laboratory and is interested in
applications of deep learning for mobile robotics.
Roberto Cipolla obtained a B.A. (Engineer-
ing) degree from the University of Cambridge
in 1984, an M.S.E. (Electrical Engineering) from
the University of Pennsylvania in 1985 and a
D.Phil. (Computer Vision) from the University of
Oxford in 1991. from 1991-92 was a Toshiba
Fellow and engineer at the Toshiba Corporation
Research and Development Centre in Kawasaki,
Japan. He joined the Department of Engineer-
ing, University of Cambridge in 1992 as a Lec-
turer and a Fellow of Jesus College. He became
a Reader in Information Engineering in 1997 and a Professor in 2000.
He became a Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering (FREng) in
2010. His research interests are in computer vision and robotics. He
has authored 3 books, edited 9 volumes and co-authored more than
300 papers.