0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021 1
Image Segmentation Using Deep Learning:
A Survey
Shervin Minaee, Member, IEEE, Yuri Boykov, Member, IEEE, Fatih Porikli, Fellow, IEEE,
Antonio Plaza, Fellow, IEEE, Nasser Kehtarnavaz, Fellow, IEEE, and Demetri Terzopoulos, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Image segmentation is a key task in computer vision and image processing with important applications such as scene
understanding, medical image analysis, robotic perception, video surveillance, augmented reality, and image compression, among others,
and numerous segmentation algorithms are found in the literature. Against this backdrop, the broad success of Deep Learning (DL) has
prompted the development of new image segmentation approaches leveraging DL models. We provide a comprehensive review of this
recent literature, covering the spectrum of pioneering efforts in semantic and instance segmentation, including convolutional pixel-labeling
networks, encoder-decoder architectures, multiscale and pyramid-based approaches, recurrent networks, visual attention models, and
generative models in adversarial settings. We investigate the relationships, strengths, and challenges of these DL-based segmentation
models, examine the widely used datasets, compare performances, and discuss promising research directions.
Index Terms—Image segmentation, deep learning, convolutional neural networks, encoder-decoder models, recurrent models,
generative models, semantic segmentation, instance segmentation, panoptic segmentation, medical image segmentation.
F
1 I NTRODUCTION
IMAGE segmentation has been a fundamental problem in
computer vision since the early days of the ﬁeld [1] (Chap-
ter 8). An essential component of many visual understanding
systems, it involves partitioning images (or video frames)
into multiple segments and objects [2] (Chapter 5) and plays
a central role in a broad range of applications [3] (Part VI),
including medical image analysis (e.g., tumor boundary
extraction and measurement of tissue volumes), autonomous
vehicles (e.g., navigable surface and pedestrian detection),
video surveillance, and augmented reality to name a few.
Image segmentation can be formulated as the problem
of classifying pixels with semantic labels (semantic seg-
mentation), or partitioning of individual objects (instance
segmentation), or both (panoptic segmentation). Semantic
segmentation performs pixel-level labeling with a set of
object categories (e.g., human, car, tree, sky) for all image
pixels; thus, it is generally a more demanding undertaking
than whole-image classiﬁcation, which predicts a single label
for the entire image. Instance segmentation extends the scope
of semantic segmentation by detecting and delineating each
object of interest in the image (e.g., individual people).
Numerous image segmentation algorithms have been
developed in the literature, from the earliest methods,
such as thresholding [4], histogram-based bundling, region-
growing [5], k-means clustering [6], watershed methods [7],
to more advanced algorithms such as active contours [8],
graph cuts [9], conditional and Markov random ﬁelds [10],
and sparsity-based [11], [12] methods. In recent years,
however, deep learning (DL) models have yielded a new
 S. Minaee is with Snapchat Machine Learning Research.
 Y. Boykov is with the University of Waterloo.
 F. Porikli is with the Australian National University, and Huawei.
 A. Plaza is with the University of Extremadura, Spain.
 N. Kehtarnavaz is with the University of Texas at Dallas.
 D. Terzopoulos is with the University of California, Los Angeles.
Manuscript received December ??, 2019; revised ?? ??, 2021.
Fig. 1. Segmentation results of DeepLabV3 [13] on sample images.
generation of image segmentation models with remarkable
performance improvements, often achieving the highest
accuracy rates on popular benchmarks (e.g., Fig. 1). This
has caused a paradigm shift in the ﬁeld.
This survey, a revised version of [14], covers the recent
literature in deep-learning-based image segmentation, includ-
ing more than 100 such segmentation methods proposed to
date. It provides a comprehensive review with insights into
different aspects of these methods, including the training
data, the choice of network architectures, loss functions,
training strategies, and their key contributions. The target
literature is organized into the following categories:
1) Fully convolutional networks
2) Convolutional models with graphical models
3) Encoder-decoder based models
4) Multiscale and pyramid network based models
5) R-CNN based models (for instance segmentation)
6) Dilated convolutional models and DeepLab family
7) Recurrent neural network based models
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
2 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
Convolution Convolution Pooling Pooling Fully -connectedOutput
Input
Fig. 2. Architecture of CNNs. From [15].
8) Attention-based models
9) Generative models and adversarial training
10) Convolutional models with active contour models
11) Other models
Within this taxonomy,
 we provide a comprehensive review and analysis of
deep-learning-based image segmentation algorithms;
 we overview popular image segmentation datasets,
grouped into 2D and 2.5D (RGB-D) images;
 we summarize the performances of the reviewed
segmentation methods on popular benchmarks;
 we discuss several challenges and future research di-
rections for deep-learning-based image segmentation.
The remainder of this survey is organized as follows:
Section 2 overviews popular Deep Neural Network (DNN)
architectures that serve as the backbones of many modern
segmentation algorithms. Section 3 reviews the most sig-
niﬁcant state-of-the-art deep learning based segmentation
models. Section 4 overviews some of the most popular image
segmentation datasets and their characteristics. Section 5
lists popular metrics for evaluating deep-learning-based
segmentation models and tabulates model performances.
Section 6 discusses the main challenges and opportunities
of deep learning-based segmentation methods. Section 7
presents our conclusions.
2 D EEP NEURAL NETWORK ARCHITECTURES
This section provides an overview of prominent DNN
architectures used by the computer vision community, in-
cluding convolutional neural networks, recurrent neural
networks and long short-term memory, encoder-decoder and
autoencoder models, and generative adversarial networks.
Due to space limitations, several other DNN architectures
that have been proposed, among them transformers, capsule
networks, gated recurrent units, and spatial transformer
networks, will not be covered.
2.1 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
CNNs are among the most successful and widely used
architectures in the deep learning community, especially
for computer vision tasks. CNNs were initially proposed by
Fukushima [16] in his seminal paper on the “Neocognitron”,
which was based on Hubel and Wiesel’s hierarchical recep-
tive ﬁeld model of the visual cortex. Subsequently, Waibel
et al. [17] introduced CNNs with weights shared among
temporal receptive ﬁelds and backpropagation training for
phoneme recognition, and LeCun et al. [15] developed a
practical CNN architecture for document recognition (Fig. 2).
Fig. 3. Architecture of a simple RNN. Courtesy of Christopher Olah [21].
CNNs usually include three types of layers: i) convolutional
layers, where a kernel (or ﬁlter) of weights is convolved to
extract features; ii) nonlinear layers, which apply (usually
element-wise) an activation function to feature maps, thus
enabling the network to model nonlinear functions; and iii)
pooling layers, which reduce spatial resolution by replacing
small neighborhoods in a feature map with some statistical in-
formation about those neighborhoods (mean, max, etc.). The
neuronal units in layers are locally connected; that is, each
unit receives weighted inputs from a small neighborhood,
known as the receptive ﬁeld, of units in the previous layer. By
stacking layers to form multiresolution pyramids, the higher-
level layers learn features from increasingly wider receptive
ﬁelds. The main computational advantage of CNNs is that
all the receptive ﬁelds in a layer share weights, resulting
in a signiﬁcantly smaller number of parameters than fully-
connected neural networks. Some of the most well known
CNN architectures include AlexNet [18], VGGNet [19], and
ResNet [20].
2.2 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and the LSTM
RNNs [22] are commonly used to process sequential data,
such as speech, text, videos, and time-series. Referring to
Fig. 3, at each time step tthe model collects the input
xtand the hidden state ht 1 from the previous step, and
outputs a target value otand the next hidden state ht+1 .
RNNs are typically problematic for long sequences as they
cannot capture long-term dependencies in many real-world
applications and often suffer from gradient vanishing or
exploding problems. However, a type of RNN known as the
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [23] is designed to avoid
these issues. The LSTM architecture (Fig. 4) includes three
gates (input gate, output gate, and forget gate) that regulate
the ﬂow of information into and out of a memory cell that
stores values over arbitrary time intervals.
Fig. 4. Architecture of a standard LSTM module. Courtesy of Olah [21].
2.3 Encoder-Decoder and Auto-Encoder Models
Encoder-decoders [24], [25] are a family of models that learn
to map data-points from an input domain to an output
domain via a two-stage network (Fig. 5): The encoder,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 3
Fig. 5. Architecture of a simple encoder-decoder model.
performing an encoding function z=g(x) , compresses the
input xinto a latent-space representation z, while the decoder
y=f(z)predicts the output yfrom z. The latent, or feature
(vector), representation captures the semantic information
of the input useful in predicting the output. Such models
are popular for sequence-to-sequence modeling in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) applications as well as in image-
to-image translation, where the output could be an enhanced
version of the image (such as in image de-blurring, or super-
resolution) or a segmentation map. Auto-encoders are a
special case of encoder-decoder models in which the input
and output are the same.
2.4 Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
GANs [26] are a newer family of deep learning models.
They consist of two networks—a generator and a discrim-
inator (Fig. 6). In the conventional GAN, the generator
network Glearns a mapping from noise z(with a prior
distribution) to a target distribution y, which is similar to
the “real” samples. The discriminator network Dattempts
to distinguish the generated “fake” samples from the real
ones. The GAN may be characterized as a minimax game
between Gand D, where Dtries to minimize its classiﬁcation
error in distinguishing fake samples from real ones, hence
maximizing a loss function, and Gtries to maximize the
discriminator network’s error, hence minimizing the loss
function. GAN variants include Convolutional-GANs [27],
conditional-GANs [28], and Wasserstein-GANs [29].
D-dimensional Noise Vector
Generator 
NetworkFake 
ImagesDiscriminator Network
Real 
ImagesPredicted 
Labels
Fig. 6. Architecture of a GAN. Courtesy of Ian Goodfellow.
3 DL-B ASED IMAGE SEGMENTATION MODELS
This section is a survey of numerous learning-based seg-
mentation methods, grouped into 10 categories based on
their model architectures. Several architectural features are
common among many of these methods, such as encoders
and decoders, skip-connections, multiscale architectures, and
more recently the use of dilated convolutions. It is convenient
to group models based on their architectural contributions
over prior models.3.1 Fully Convolutional Models
Long et al. [30] proposed Fully Convolutional Networks
(FCNs), a milestone in DL-based semantic image segmenta-
tion models. An FCN (Fig. 7) includes only convolutional
layers, which enables it to output a segmentation map whose
size is the same as that of the input image. To handle
arbitrarily-sized images, the authors modiﬁed existing CNN
architectures, such as VGG16 and GoogLeNet, by removing
all fully-connected layers such that the model outputs a
spatial segmentation map instead of classiﬁcation scores.
Fig. 7. The FCN learns to make pixel-accurate predictions. From [30].
Through the use of skip connections (Fig. 8) in which
feature maps from the ﬁnal layers of the model are up-
sampled and fused with feature maps of earlier layers, the
model combines semantic information (from deep, coarse
layers) and appearance information (from shallow, ﬁne lay-
ers) in order to produce accurate and detailed segmentations.
Tested on PASCAL VOC, NYUDv2, and SIFT Flow, the model
achieved state-of-the-art segmentation performance.
Fig. 8. Skip connections combine coarse and ﬁne information. From [30].
FCNs have been applied to a variety of segmentation
problems, such as brain tumor segmentation [31], instance-
aware semantic segmentation [32], skin lesion segmenta-
tion [33], and iris segmentation [34]. While demonstrating
that DNNs can be trained to perform semantic segmentation
in an end-to-end manner on variable-sized images, the
conventional FCN model has some limitations—it is too
computationally expensive for real-time inference, it does
not account for global context information in an efﬁcient
manner, and it is not easily generalizable to 3D images.
Several researchers have attempted to overcome some of the
limitations of the FCN. For example, Liu et al. [35] proposed
ParseNet (Fig. 9), which adds global context to FCNs by using
the average feature for a layer to augment the features at
each location. The feature map for a layer is pooled over the
whole image, resulting in a context vector. The context vector
is normalized and unpooled to produce new feature maps of
the same size as the initial ones, which are then concatenated,
which amounts to an FCN whose convolutional layers are
replaced by the described module (Fig. 9e).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
4 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
Fig. 9. The ParseNet (e) uses extra global context to produce a segmen-
tation (d) smoother than that of an FCN (c). From [35].
3.2 CNNs With Graphical Models
As discussed, the FCN ignores potentially useful scene-level
semantic context. To exploit more context, several approaches
incorporate into DL architectures probabilistic graphical
models, such as Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) and
Markov Random Fields (MRFs).
Due to the invariance properties that make CNNs good
for high level tasks such as classiﬁcation, responses from
the later layers of deep CNNs are not sufﬁciently well
localized for accurate object segmentation. To address this
drawback, Chen et al. [36] proposed a semantic segmentation
algorithm that combines CNNs and fully-connected CRFs
(Fig. 10). They showed that their model can localize segment
boundaries with higher accuracy than was possible with
previous methods.
Fig. 10. A CNN+CRF model. From [36].
Schwing and Urtasun [37] proposed a fully-connected
deep structured network for image segmentation. They
jointly trained CNNs and fully-connected CRFs for semantic
image segmentation, and achieved encouraging results on
the challenging PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset. Zheng et al. [38]
proposed a similar semantic segmentation approach. In
related work, Lin et al. [39] proposed an efﬁcient semantic
segmentation model based on contextual deep CRFs. They
explored “patch-patch” context (between image regions) and
“patch-background” context to improve semantic segmenta-
tion through the use of contextual information.
Liu et al. [40] proposed a semantic segmentation algorithm
that incorporates rich information into MRFs, including high-
order relations and mixture of label contexts. Unlike previous
efforts that optimized MRFs using iterative algorithms, they
proposed a CNN model, namely a Parsing Network, which
enables deterministic end-to-end computation in one pass.
3.3 Encoder-Decoder Based Models
Most of the popular DL-based segmentation models use
some kind of encoder-decoder architecture. We group these
models into two categories: those for general image segmen-
tation, and those for medical image segmentation.3.3.1 General Image Segmentation
Noh et al. [41] introduced semantic segmentation based on
deconvolution (a.k.a. transposed convolution). Their model,
DeConvNet (Fig. 11), consists of two parts, an encoder using
convolutional layers adopted from the VGG 16-layer net-
work and a multilayer deconvolutional network that inputs
the feature vector and generates a map of pixel-accurate
class probabilities. The latter comprises deconvolution and
unpooling layers, which identify pixel-wise class labels and
predict segmentation masks.
Fig. 11. Deconvolutional semantic segmentation. From [41].
Badrinarayanan et al. [25] proposed SegNet, a fully
convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image seg-
mentation (Fig. 12). Similar to the deconvolution network,
the core trainable segmentation engine of SegNet consists
of an encoder network, which is topologically identical to
the 13 convolutional layers of the VGG16 network, and a
corresponding decoder network followed by a pixel-wise
classiﬁcation layer. The main novelty of SegNet is in the way
the decoder upsamples its lower-resolution input feature
map(s); speciﬁcally, using pooling indices computed in the
max-pooling step of the corresponding encoder to perform
nonlinear up-sampling.
Fig. 12. The SegNet model. From [25].
A limitation of encoder-decoder based models is the
loss of ﬁne-grained image information, due to the loss
of resolution through the encoding process. HRNet [42]
(Fig. 13) addresses this shortcoming. Other than recovering
high-resolution representations as is done in DeConvNet,
SegNet, and other models, HRNet maintains high-resolution
representations through the encoding process by connecting
the high-to-low resolution convolution streams in parallel
and repeatedly exchanging the information across resolu-
tions. There are four stages: the 1st stage consists of high-
resolution convolutions, while the 2nd/3rd/4th stage repeats
2-resolution/3-resolution/4-resolution blocks. Several recent
semantic segmentation models use HRNet as a backbone.
Several other works adopt transposed convolutions, or
encoder-decoders for image segmentation, such as Stacked
Deconvolutional Network (SDN) [43], Linknet [44], W-
Net [45], and locality-sensitive deconvolution networks for
RGB-D segmentation [46].
3.3.2 Medical and Biomedical Image Segmentation
Several models inspired by FCNs and encoder-decoder
networks were initially developed for medical/biomedical
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 5
c
hannel
mapscon
v.
unit
strided
con
v.upsample
Fig. 13. The HRNet architecture. From [42].
image segmentation, but are now also being used outside
the medical domain.
Ronneberger et al. [47] proposed the U-Net (Fig. 14) for
efﬁciently segmenting biological microscopy images. The
U-Net architecture comprises two parts, a contracting path
to capture context, and a symmetric expanding path that
enables precise localization. The U-Net training strategy
relies on the use of data augmentation to learn effectively
from very few annotated images. It was trained on 30
transmitted light microscopy images, and it won the ISBI cell
tracking challenge 2015 by a large margin.
Fig. 14. The U-Net model. From [47].
Various extensions of U-Net have been developed for
different kinds of images and problem domains; for example,
Zhou et al. [48] developed a nested U-Net architecture, Zhang
et al. [49] developed a road segmentation algorithm based on
U-Net, and Cicek et al. [50] proposed a U-Net architecture
for 3D images.
V-Net (Fig. 15), proposed by Milletari et al. [51] for 3D
medical image segmentation, is another well known FCN-
based model. The authors introduced a new loss function
based on the Dice coefﬁcient, enabling the model to deal
with situations in which there is a strong imbalance between
the number of voxels in the foreground and background.
The network was trained end-to-end on MRI images of
the prostate and learns to predict segmentation for the
whole volume at once. Some of the other relevant works
on medical image segmentation includes Progressive Dense
V-Net et al. for automatic segmentation of pulmonary lobes
from chest CT images, and the 3D-CNN encoder for lesion
segmentation [52].
3.4 Multiscale and Pyramid Network Based Models
Multiscale analysis, a well established idea in image pro-
cessing, has been deployed in various neural network
architectures. One of the most prominent models of this
Fig. 15. The V-Net model for 3D image segmentation. From [51].
sort is the Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) proposed by
Lin et al. [53], which was developed for object detection but
was also applied to segmentation. The inherent multiscale,
pyramidal hierarchy of deep CNNs was used to construct
feature pyramids with marginal extra cost. To merge low and
high resolution features, the FPN is composed of a bottom-up
pathway, a top-down pathway and lateral connections. The
concatenated feature maps are then processed by a 33
convolution to produce the output of each stage. Finally,
each stage of the top-down pathway generates a prediction
to detect an object. For image segmentation, the authors use
two multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) to generate the masks.
Zhao et al. [54] developed the Pyramid Scene Parsing
Network (PSPN), a multiscale network to better learn the
global context representation of a scene (Fig. 16). Multiple
patterns are extracted from the input image using a residual
network (ResNet) as a feature extractor, with a dilated net-
work. These feature maps are then fed into a pyramid pooling
module to distinguish patterns of different scales. They are
pooled at four different scales, each one corresponding to a
pyramid level, and processed by a 11convolutional layer to
reduce their dimensions. The outputs of the pyramid levels
are up-sampled and concatenated with the initial feature
maps to capture both local and global context information.
Finally, a convolutional layer is used to generate the pixel-
wise predictions.
Fig. 16. The PSPN architecture. From [54].
Ghiasi and Fowlkes [55] developed a multiresolution
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
6 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
reconstruction architecture based on a Laplacian pyramid
that uses skip connections from higher resolution feature
maps and multiplicative gating to successively reﬁne seg-
ment boundaries reconstructed from lower-resolution maps.
They showed that while the apparent spatial resolution of
convolutional feature maps is low, the high-dimensional fea-
ture representation contains signiﬁcant sub-pixel localization
information.
Other models use multiscale analysis for segmentation,
among them Dynamic Multiscale Filters Network (DM-
Net) [56], Context Contrasted Network and gated multiscale
aggregation (CCN) [57], Adaptive Pyramid Context Network
(APC-Net) [58], MultiScale Context Intertwining (MSCI) [59],
and salient object segmentation [60].
3.5 R-CNN Based Models
The Regional CNN (R-CNN) and its extensions have proven
successful in object detection applications. In particular, the
Faster R-CNN [61] architecture (Fig. 17) uses a region pro-
posal network (RPN) that proposes bounding box candidates.
The RPN extracts a Region of Interest (RoI), and an RoIPool
layer computes features from these proposals to infer the
bounding box coordinates and class of the object. Some
extensions of R-CNN have been used to address the instance
segmentation problem; i.e., the task of simultaneously per-
forming object detection and semantic segmentation.
Fig. 17. Faster R-CNN architecture. Each image is processed by convo-
lutional layers and its features are extracted, a sliding window is used in
RPN for each location over the feature map, for each location, k(k= 9 )
anchor boxes are used (3 scales of 128, 256 and 512, and 3 aspect
ratios of 1:1, 1:2, 2:1) to generate a region proposal; A cls layer outputs
2k scores whether there or not there is an object for kboxes; A reg layer
outputs 4k for the coordinates (box center coordinates, width and height)
ofkboxes. From [61].
He et al. [62] proposed Mask R-CNN (Fig. 18), which
outperformed previous benchmarks on many COCO object
instance segmentation challenges (Fig. 19), efﬁciently detect-
ing objects in an image while simultaneously generating a
high-quality segmentation mask for each instance. Essentially,
it is a Faster R-CNN with 3 output branches—the ﬁrst com-
putes the bounding box coordinates, the second computes
the associated classes, and the third computes the binary
mask to segment the object. The Mask R-CNN loss function
combines the losses of the bounding box coordinates, the
predicted class, and the segmentation mask, and trains all of
them jointly.
The Path Aggregation Network (PANet) proposed by Liu
et al. [63] is based on the Mask R-CNN and FPN models
(Fig. 20). The feature extractor of the network uses an
FPN backbone with a new augmented bottom-up pathway
Fig. 18. Mask R-CNN architecture. From [62].
Fig. 19. Mask R-CNN instance segmentation results. From [62].
improving the propagation of lower-layer features. Each
stage of this third pathway takes as input the feature maps
of the previous stage and processes them with a 33
convolutional layer. A lateral connection adds the output
to the same-stage feature maps of the top-down pathway
and these feed the next stage.
Fig. 20. The Path Aggregation Network. (a) FPN backbone. (b) Bottom-
up path augmentation. (c) Adaptive feature pooling. (d) Box branch. (e)
Fully-connected fusion. From [63].
Dai et al. [64] developed a multitask network for instance-
aware semantic segmentation that consists of three networks
for differentiating instances, estimating masks, and catego-
rizing objects. These networks form a cascaded structure
and are designed to share their convolutional features. Hu
et al. [65] proposed a new partially-supervised training
paradigm together with a novel weight transfer function,
which enables training instance segmentation models on a
large set of categories, all of which have box annotations, but
only a small fraction of which have mask annotations.
Chen et al. [66] developed an instance segmentation
model, MaskLab, by reﬁning object detection with semantic
and direction features based on Faster R-CNN. This model
produces three outputs (Fig. 21), box detection, semantic
segmentation logits for pixel-wise classiﬁcation, and direction
prediction logits for predicting each pixel’s direction toward
its instance center. Building on the Faster R-CNN object
detector, the predicted boxes provide accurate localization of
object instances. Within each region of interest, MaskLab per-
forms foreground/background segmentation by combining
semantic and direction prediction.
Tensormask, proposed by Chen et al. [67], is based on
dense sliding window instance segmentation. The authors
treat dense instance segmentation as a prediction task over
4D tensors and present a general framework that enables
novel operators on 4D tensors. They demonstrate that the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 7
Fig. 21. The MaskLab model. From [66].
tensor approach yields large gains over baselines, with results
comparable to Mask R-CNN.
Other instance segmentation models have been devel-
oped based on R-CNN, such as those developed for mask
proposals, including R-FCN [68], DeepMask [69], Polar-
Mask [70], boundary-aware instance segmentation [71], and
CenterMask [72]. Another promising approach is to tackle
the instance segmentation problem by learning grouping
cues for bottom-up segmentation, such as deep watershed
transform [73], real-time instance segmentation [74], and
semantic instance segmentation via deep metric learning [75].
3.6 Dilated Convolutional Models
Dilated (a.k.a. “atrous”) convolution introduces to convo-
lutional layers another parameter, the dilation rate. For
example, a 33kernel (Fig. 22) with a dilation rate of
2 will have the same size receptive ﬁeld as a 55kernel
while using only 9 parameters, thus enlarging the receptive
ﬁeld with no increase in computational cost.
Fig. 22. Dilated convolution. A 33kernel at different dilation rates.
Dilated convolutions have been popular in the ﬁeld of
real-time segmentation, and many recent publications report
the use of this technique. Some of the most important include
the DeepLab family [76], multiscale context aggregation
[77], Dense Upsampling Convolution and Hybrid Dilated
Convolution (DUC-HDC) [78], densely connected Atrous
Spatial Pyramid Pooling (DenseASPP) [79], and the Efﬁcient
Network (ENet) [80].
DeepLabv1 [36] and DeepLabv2 [76], developed by Chen
et al., are among the most popular image segmentation
models. The latter has three key features (Fig. 23). First is
the use of dilated convolution to address the decreasing
resolution in the network caused by max-pooling and
striding. Second is Atrous Spatial Pyramid Pooling (ASPP),
which probes an incoming convolutional feature layer with
ﬁlters at multiple sampling rates, thus capturing objects as
well as multiscale image context to robustly segment objects
at multiple scales. Third is improved localization of object
boundaries by combining methods from deep CNNs, such as
fully convolutional VGG-16 or ResNet 101, and probabilistic
graphical models, speciﬁcally fully-connected CRFs.
Fig. 23. The DeepLab model. From [76].
Subsequently, Chen et al. [13] proposed DeepLabv3,
which combines cascaded and parallel modules of dilated
convolutions. The parallel convolution modules are grouped
in the ASPP . A 11convolution and batch normalization
are added in the ASPP . All the outputs are concatenated
and processed by another 1 1convolution to create
the ﬁnal output with logits for each pixel. Next, Chen et
al. [81] released Deeplabv3+ (Fig. 24), which uses an encoder-
decoder architecture including dilated separable convolution
composed of a depthwise convolution (spatial convolution
for each channel of the input) and pointwise convolution
(11convolution with the depthwise convolution as input).
They used the DeepLabv3 framework as the encoder. The
most relevant model has a modiﬁed Xception backbone
with more layers, dilated depthwise separable convolutions
instead of max pooling and batch normalization.
Fig. 24. The DeepLab-v3+ model. From [81].
3.7 RNN Based Models
While CNNs are a natural ﬁt for computer vision prob-
lems, they are not the only possibility. RNNs are useful in
modeling the short/long term dependencies among pixels to
(potentially) improve the estimation of the segmentation map.
Using RNNs, pixels may be linked together and processed
sequentially to model global contexts and improve semantic
segmentation. However the natural 2D structure of images
poses a challenge.
Fig. 25. The ReSeg model (without the pre-trained VGG-16 feature
extractor). From [82].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
8 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
Visin et al. [82] proposed an RNN-based model for
semantic segmentation called ReSeg (Fig. 25). This model
is mainly based on ReNet [83], which was developed for
image classiﬁcation. Each ReNet layer is composed of four
RNNs that sweep the image horizontally and vertically in
both directions, encoding patches/activations, and providing
relevant global information. To perform image segmentation
with the ReSeg model, ReNet layers are stacked atop pre-
trained VGG-16 convolutional layers, which extract generic
local features, and are then followed by up-sampling layers to
recover the original image resolution in the ﬁnal predictions.
Byeon et al. [84] performed per-pixel segmentation and
classiﬁcation of images of natural scenes using 2D LSTM
networks, which learn textures and the complex spatial
dependencies of labels in a single model that carries out
classiﬁcation, segmentation, and context integration.
Fig. 26. The graph-LSTM model for semantic segmentation. From [85].
Liang et al. [85] proposed a semantic segmentation model
based on a graph-LSTM network (Fig. 26) in which convo-
lutional layers are augmented by graph-LSTM layers built
on super-pixel maps, which provide a more global structural
context. These layers generalize the LSTM for uniform,
array-structured data (i.e., row, grid, or diagonal LSTMs) to
nonuniform, graph-structured data, where arbitrary-shaped
superpixels are semantically consistent nodes and the ad-
jacency relations between superpixels correspond to edges,
thus forming an undirected graph (Fig. 27).
Fig. 27. Comparison of conventional RNN models and the graph-LSTM.
From [85].
Xiang and Fox [86] proposed Data Associated Recurrent
Neural Networks (DA-RNNs) for joint 3D scene mapping
and semantic labeling. DA-RNNs use a new recurrent neural
network architecture for semantic labeling on RGB-D videos.
The output of the network is integrated with mapping
techniques such as Kinect-Fusion in order to inject semantic
information into the reconstructed 3D scene.
Hu et al. [87] developed a semantic segmentation al-
gorithm that combines a CNN to encode the image and
an LSTM to encode its linguistic description. To produce
pixel-wise image segmentations from language inputs, theypropose an end-to-end trainable recurrent and convolutional
model that jointly learns to process visual and linguistic
information (Fig. 28). This differs from traditional semantic
segmentation over a predeﬁned set of semantic classes; i.e.,
the phrase “two men sitting on the right bench” requires
segmenting only the two people on the right bench and no
others sitting on another bench or standing. Fig. 29 shows
an example segmentation result by the model.
Fig. 28. The CNN+LSTM architecture for semantic segmentation from
natural language expressions. From [87].
Fig. 29. CNN+LSTM segmentation masks generated for the query
“people in blue coat”. From [87].
A drawback of RNN-based models is that they will
generally be slower than their CNN counterparts as their
sequential nature is not amenable to parallelization.
3.8 Attention-Based Models
Attention mechanisms have been persistently explored in
computer vision over the years, and it is not surprising to
ﬁnd publications that apply them to semantic segmentation.
Fig. 30. Attention-based semantic segmentation model. From [88].
Chen et al. [88] proposed an attention mechanism that
learns to softly weight multiscale features at each pixel
location. They adapt a powerful semantic segmentation
model and jointly train it with multiscale images and the
attention model In Fig. 30, the model assigns large weights
to the person (green dashed circle) in the background for
features from scale 1.0 as well as on the large child (magenta
dashed circle) for features from scale 0.5. The attention
mechanism enables the model to assess the importance of
features at different positions and scales, and it outperforms
average and max pooling.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 9
Fig. 31. The RAN architecture. From [89].
Unlike approaches in which convolutional classiﬁers
are trained to learn the representative semantic features
of labeled objects, Huang et al. [89] proposed a Reverse
Attention Network (RAN) architecture (Fig. 31) for semantic
segmentation that also applies reverse attention mechanisms,
thereby training the model to capture the opposite concept—
features that are not associated with a target class. The RAN
network performs the direct and reverse-attention learning
processes simultaneously.
Liet al. [90] developed a Pyramid Attention Network
for semantic segmentation, which exploits global contextual
information for semantic segmentation. Eschewing com-
plicated dilated convolutions and decoder networks, they
combined attention mechanisms and spatial pyramids to
extract precise dense features for pixel labeling. Fu et al. [91]
proposed a dual attention network for scene segmentation
that can capture rich contextual dependencies based on the
self-attention mechanism. Speciﬁcally, they append two types
of attention modules on top of a dilated FCN that models the
semantic inter-dependencies in spatial and channel dimen-
sions, respectively. The position attention module selectively
aggregates the features at each position via weighted sums.
Other applications of attention mechanisms to semantic
segmentation include OCNet [92], which employs an ob-
ject context pooling inspired by self-attention mechanism,
ResNeSt: Split-Attention Networks [93], Height-driven At-
tention Networks [94], Expectation-Maximization Attention
(EMANet) [95], Criss-Cross Attention Network (CCNet) [96],
end-to-end instance segmentation with recurrent atten-
tion [97], a point-wise spatial attention network for scene
parsing [98], and Discriminative Feature Network (DFN) [99].
3.9 Generative Models and Adversarial Training
GANs have been applied to a wide range of tasks in
computer vision, not excluding image segmentation.
Fig. 32. The GAN for semantic segmentation. From [100].
Luc et al. [100] proposed an adversarial training approach
for semantic segmentation in which they trained a convolu-
tional semantic segmentation network (Fig. 32), along with an
adversarial network that discriminates between ground-truthsegmentation maps and those generated by the segmentation
network. They showed that the adversarial training approach
yields improved accuracy on the Stanford Background and
PASCAL VOC 2012 datasets.
Souly et al. [101] proposed semi-weakly supervised
semantic segmentation using GANs. Their model consists
of a generator network providing extra training examples
to a multiclass classiﬁer, acting as discriminator in the GAN
framework, that assigns sample a label from the possible
label classes or marks it as a fake sample (extra class).
Hung et al. [102] developed a framework for semi-
supervised semantic segmentation using an adversarial
network. They designed an FCN discriminator to differ-
entiate the predicted probability maps from the ground truth
segmentation distribution, considering the spatial resolution.
The loss function of this model has three terms: cross-entropy
loss on the segmentation ground truth, adversarial loss of
the discriminator network, and semi-supervised loss based
on the conﬁdence map output of the discriminator.
Xue et al. [103] proposed an adversarial network with
multiscale L1 Loss for medical image segmentation. They
used an FCN as the segmentor to generate segmentation label
maps, and proposed a novel adversarial critic network with a
multi-scale L1 loss function to force the critic and segmentor
to learn both global and local features that capture long and
short range spatial relationships between pixels.
Other approaches based on adversarial training include
cell image segmentation using GANs [104], and segmentation
and generation of the invisible parts of objects [105].
3.10 CNN Models With Active Contour Models
The exploration of synergies between FCNs and Active
Contour Models (ACMs) [8] has recently attracted research
interest.
One approach is to formulate new loss functions that are
inspired by ACM principles. For example, inspired by the
global energy formulation of [106], Chen et al. [107] proposed
a supervised loss layer that incorporated area and size infor-
mation of the predicted masks during training of an FCN
and tackled the problem of ventricle segmentation in cardiac
MRI. Similarly, Gur et al. [108] presented an unsupervised
loss function based on morphological active contours without
edges [109] for microvascular image segmentation.
A different approach initially sought to utilize the ACM
merely as a post-processor of the output of an FCN and
several efforts attempted modest co-learning by pre-training
the FCN. One example of an ACM post-processor for
the task of semantic segmentation of natural images is
the work by Le et al. [110] in which level-set ACMs are
implemented as RNNs. Deep Active Contours by Rupprecht
et al. [111], is another example. For medical image seg-
mentation, Hatamizadeh et al. [112] proposed an integrated
Deep Active Lesion Segmentation (DALS) model that trains
the FCN backbone to predict the parameter functions of a
novel, locally-parameterized level-set energy functional. In
another relevant effort, Marcos et al. [113] proposed Deep
Structured Active Contours (DSAC), which combines ACMs
and pre-trained FCNs in a structured prediction framework
for building instance segmentation (albeit with manual
initialization) in aerial images. For the same application,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
10 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
Cheng et al. [114] proposed the Deep Active Ray Network
(DarNet), which is similar to DSAC, but with a different
explicit ACM formulation based on polar coordinates to
prevent contour self-intersection.
A truly end-to-end backpropagation trainable, fully-
integrated FCN-ACM combination was recently introduced
by Hatamizadeh et al. [115], dubbed Trainable Deep Active
Contours (TDAC). Going beyond [112], they implemented
the locally-parameterized level-set ACM in the form of
additional convolutional layers following the layers of the
backbone FCN, exploiting Tensorﬂow’s automatic differen-
tiation mechanism to backpropagate training error gradi-
ents throughout the entire DCAC framework. The fully-
automated model requires no intervention either during
training or segmentation, can naturally segment multiple
instances of objects of interest, and deal with arbitrary object
shape including sharp corners.
3.11 Other Models
Other popular DL architectures for image segmentation
include the following:
Context Encoding Network (EncNet) [116] uses a basic
feature extractor and feeds the feature maps into a context
encoding module. ReﬁneNet [117] is a multipath reﬁnement
network that explicitly exploits all the information available
along the down-sampling process to enable high-resolution
prediction using long-range residual connections. Seed-
net [118] introduced an automatic seed generation technique
with deep reinforcement learning that learns to solve the in-
teractive segmentation problem. Object-Contextual Represen-
tations (OCR) [42] learns object regions and the relation be-
tween each pixel and each object region, augmenting the rep-
resentation pixels with the object-contextual representation.
Additional models and methods include BoxSup [119], Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCN) [120], Wide ResNet [121],
Exfuse [122] (enhancing low-level and high-level features
fusion), Feedforward-Net [123], saliency-aware models for
geodesic video segmentation [124], Dual Image Segmentation
(DIS) [125], FoveaNet [126] (perspective-aware scene pars-
ing), Ladder DenseNet [127], Bilateral Segmentation Network
(BiSeNet) [128], Semantic Prediction Guidance for Scene
Parsing (SPGNet) [129], gated shape CNNs [130], Adaptive
Context Network (AC-Net) [131], Dynamic-Structured Se-
mantic Propagation Network (DSSPN) [132], Symbolic Graph
Reasoning (SGR) [133], CascadeNet [134], Scale-Adaptive
Convolutions (SAC) [135], Uniﬁed Perceptual parsing Net-
work (UperNet) [136], segmentation by re-training and
self-training [137], densely connected neural architecture
search [138], hierarchical multiscale attention [139], Efﬁcient
RGB-D Semantic Segmentation (ESA-Net) [140], Iterative
Pyramid Contexts [141], and Learning Dynamic Routing for
Semantic Segmentation [142].
Panoptic segmentation [143] is growing in popularity.
Efforts in this direction include Panoptic Feature Pyramid
Network (PFPN) [144], attention-guided network for panop-
tic segmentation [145], seamless scene segmentation [146],
panoptic Deeplab [147], uniﬁed panoptic segmentation net-
work [148], and efﬁcient panoptic segmentation [149].
Fig. 33 provides a timeline of some of the most represen-
tative DL image segmentation models since 2014.4 D ATASETS
In this section we survey the image datasets most commonly
used to train and test DL image segmentation models,
grouping them into 3 categories—2D (pixel) images, 2.5D
RGB-D (color+depth) images, and 3D (voxel) images—and
provide details about the characteristics of each dataset.
Data augmentation is often used to increase the number
of labeled samples, especially for small datasets such as
those in the medical imaging domain, thus improving the
performance of DL segmentation models. A set of trans-
formations is applied either in the data space, or feature
space, or both (i.e., both the image and the segmentation
map). Typical transformations include translation, reﬂection,
rotation, warping, scaling, color space shifting, cropping, and
projections onto principal components. Data augmentation
can also beneﬁt by yielding faster convergence, decreasing
the chance of over-ﬁtting, and enhancing generalization. For
some small datasets, data augmentation has been shown to
boost model performance by more than 20%.
4.1 2D Image Datasets
The bulk of image segmentation research has focused on 2D
images; therefore, many 2D image segmentation datasets are
available. The following are some of the most popular:
PASCAL Visual Object Classes (VOC) [150] is a highly
popular dataset in computer vision, with annotated images
available for 5 tasks—classiﬁcation, segmentation, detection,
action recognition, and person layout. For the segmentation
task, there are 21 labeled object classes and pixels are labeled
as background if they do not belong to any of these classes.
The dataset is divided into two sets, training and validation,
with 1,464 and 1,449 images, respectively, and a private test
set for the actual challenge. Fig. 34 shows an example image
and its pixel-wise label.
PASCAL Context [152] is an extension of the PASCAL
VOC 2010 detection challenge. It includes pixel-wise labels
for all the training images. It contains more than 400 classes
(including the original 20 classes plus backgrounds from
PASCAL VOC segmentation), in three categories (objects,
stuff, and hybrids). Many of the object categories of this
dataset are too sparse and; therefore, a subset of 59 classes is
usually selected for use.
Microsoft Common Objects in Context (MS
COCO) [153] is a large-scale object detection, segmentation,
and captioning dataset. COCO includes images of complex
everyday scenes, containing common objects in their natural
contexts. This dataset contains photos of 91 object types,
with a total of 2.5 million labeled instances in 328K images.
Fig. 35 compares MS-COCO labels with those of previous
datasets for a sample image.
Cityscapes [154] is a large database with a focus on
semantic understanding of urban street scenes. It contains
a diverse set of stereo video sequences recorded in street
scenes from 50 cities, with high quality pixel-level annotation
of 5K frames, in addition to a set of 20K weakly annotated
frames. It includes semantic and dense pixel annotations of
30 classes, grouped into 8 categories—ﬂat surfaces, humans,
vehicles, constructions, objects, nature, sky, and void. Fig. 36
shows sample segmentation maps from this dataset.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 11
Fig. 33. Timeline of representative DL-based image segmentation algorithms. Orange, green, and yellow blocks indicate semantic, instance, and
panoptic segmentation algorithms, respectively.
Fig. 34. An example image from the PASCAL VOC dataset. From [151].
Fig. 35. A sample image and segmentation map in COCO. From [153].
ADE20K / MIT Scene Parsing (SceneParse150) offers a
training and evaluation platform for scene parsing algo-
rithms. The data for this benchmark comes from the ADE20K
dataset [134], which contains more than 20K scene-centric
images exhaustively annotated with objects and object parts.
The benchmark is divided into 20K images for training, 2K
images for validation, and another batch of images for testing.
There are 150 semantic categories in this dataset.
SiftFlow [155] includes 2,688 annotated images, from
a subset of the LabelMe database, of 8 different outdoor
scenes, among them streets, mountains, ﬁelds, beaches, and
buildings, and in one of 33 semantic classes.
Stanford Background [156] comprises outdoor images
of scenes from existing datasets, such as LabelMe, MSRC,
and PASCAL VOC. It includes 715 images with at least one
foreground object. The dataset is pixel-wise annotated, and
Fig. 36. Segmentation maps from the Cityscapes dataset. From [154].can be used for semantic scene understanding.
Berkeley Segmentation Dataset (BSD) [157] contains
12,000 hand-labeled segmentations of 1,000 Corel dataset
images from 30 human subjects. It aims to provide an
empirical basis for research on image segmentation and
boundary detection. Half of the segmentations were obtained
from presenting the subject a color image and the other half
from presenting a grayscale image. The public benchmark
based on this data consists of all of the grayscale and color
segmentations for 300 images. The images are divided into a
training set of 200 images and a test set of 100 images.
Youtube-Objects [158] contains videos collected from
YouTube, which include objects from ten PASCAL VOC
classes (aeroplane, bird, boat, car, cat, cow, dog, horse,
motorbike, and train). The original dataset did not contain
pixel-wise annotations (as it was originally developed for
object detection, with weak annotations). However, Jain et
al.[159] manually annotated a subset of 126 sequences, and
then extracted a subset of frames to further generate semantic
labels. In total, there are about 10,167 annotated 480x360 pixel
frames available in this dataset.
CamVid: is another scene understanding database (with
a focus on road/driving scenes) which was originally cap-
tured as ﬁve video sequences via camera mounted on the
dashboard of a car. A total of 701 frames were provided by
sampling from the sequences. These frames were manually
annotated into 32 classes.
KITTI [160] is one of the most popular datasets for
autonomous driving, containing videos of trafﬁc scenarios,
recorded with a variety of sensor modalities (including high-
resolution RGB, grayscale stereo cameras, and a 3D laser
scanners). The original dataset does not contain ground truth
for semantic segmentation, but researchers have manually
annotated parts of the dataset; e.g., Alvarez et al. [161] gen-
erated ground truth for 323 images from the road detection
challenge with 3 classes—road, vertical, and sky.
Other datasets for image segmentation purposes in-
clude Semantic Boundaries Dataset (SBD) [162], PASCAL
Part [163], SYNTHIA [164], and Adobe’s Portrait Segmen-
tation [165].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
12 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
Fig. 37. A sample from the NYU V2 dataset. From left: RGB image,
pre-processed depth image, class labels map. From [166].
4.2 2.5D Datasets
With the availability of affordable range scanners, RGB-D
images have became increasingly widespread. The following
RGB-D datasets are among the most popular:
NYU-Depth V2 [166] consists of video sequences from
a variety of indoor scenes, recorded by the RGB and depth
cameras of the Microsoft Kinect. It includes 1,449 densely
labeled RGB and depth image pairs of more than 450 scenes
taken from 3 cities. Each object is labeled with a class and
instance number (e.g., cup1, cup2, cup3, etc.). It also contains
407,024 unlabeled frames. Fig. 37 shows an RGB-D sample
and its label map.
SUN-3D [167] is a large RGB-D video dataset that
contains 415 sequences captured from 254 different spaces
in 41 different buildings; 8 sequences are annotated and
more will be annotated in the future. Each annotated frame
provides the semantic segmentation of the objects in the
scene as well as information about the camera pose.
SUN RGB-D [168] provides an RGB-D benchmark for ad-
vancing the state-of-the-art of all major scene understanding
tasks. It is captured by four different sensors and contains
10,000 RGB-D images at a scale similar to PASCAL VOC.
ScanNet [169] is an RGB-D video dataset containing 2.5
million views in more than 1,500 scans, annotated with
3D camera poses, surface reconstructions, and instance-
level semantic segmentations. To collect these data, an easy-
to-use and scalable RGB-D capture system was designed
that includes automated surface reconstruction, and the
semantic annotation was crowd-sourced. Using this data
helped achieve state-of-the-art performance on several 3D
scene understanding tasks, including 3D object classiﬁcation,
semantic voxel labeling, and CAD model retrieval.
Stanford 2D-3D [170] provides a variety of mutually
registered 2D, 2.5D, and 3D modalities, with instance-level
semantic and geometric annotations, acquired from 6 indoor
areas. It contains over 70,000 RGB images, along with the
corresponding depths, surface normals, semantic annota-
tions, as well as global XYZ images, camera information, and
registered raw and semantically annotated 3D meshes and
point clouds.
Another popular 2.5D datasets is UW RGB-D Object
Dataset [171], which contains 300 common household objects
recorded using a Kinect-style sensor.
5 DL S EGMENTATION MODEL PERFORMANCE
In this section, we summarize the metrics commonly used
in evaluating the performance of segmentation models and
report the performance of DL-based segmentation models
on benchmark datasets.5.1 Metrics for Image Segmentation Models
Ideally, an image segmentation model should be evaluated
in multiple respects, such as quantitative accuracy, visual
quality, speed (inference time), and storage requirements
(memory footprint). However, most researchers to date have
focused on metrics for quantifying model accuracy. The
following metrics are most popular:
Pixel accuracy is the ratio of properly classiﬁed pixels
divided by the total number of pixels. For K + 1 classes (K
foreground classes and the background) pixel accuracy is
deﬁned as
PA =PK
i=0 piiPK
i=0PK
j=0pij; (1)
where pijis the number of pixels of class ipredicted as
belonging to class j.
Mean Pixel Accuracy (MPA) is an extension of PA, in
which the ratio of correct pixels is computed in a per-class
manner and then averaged over the total number of classes:
MPA =1
K + 1KX
i=0piiPK
j=0pij: (2)
Intersection over Union (IoU) , or the Jaccard Index , is
deﬁned as the area of intersection between the predicted
segmentation map Aand the ground truth map B, divided
by the area of the union between the two maps, and ranges
between 0 and 1:
IoU =J(A; B ) =jA\Bj
jA[Bj: (3)
Mean-IoU is deﬁned as the average IoU over all classes.
Precision / Recall / F1 score can be deﬁned for each class,
as well as at the aggregate level, as follows:
Precision =TP
TP +FP; Recall =TP
TP +FN; (4)
where TP refers to the true positive fraction, FP refers to the
false positive fraction, and FN refers to the false negative
fraction. Usually one is interested in a combined version
of precision and recall rates; the F1 score is deﬁned as the
harmonic mean of precision and recall:
F1 =2Precision Recall
Precision +Recall: (5)
Dice coefﬁcient , commonly used in medical image analy-
sis, can be deﬁned as twice the overlap area of the predicted
and ground-truth maps divided by the total number of pixels.
Dice =2jA\Bj
jAj +jBj: (6)
It is very similar to the IoU (3) and when applied to
binary maps, with foreground as the positive class, the Dice
coefﬁcient is identical to the F1 score (7):
Dice =2TP
2TP +FP +FN=F1: (7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 13
TABLE 1
Accuracies of segmentation models on the PASCAL VOC test set
Method Backbone mIoU
FCN [30] VGG-16 62.2
CRF-RNN [38] - 72.0
CRF-RNN[38] - 74.7
BoxSup* [119] - 75.1
Piecewise[39] - 78.0
DPN[40] - 77.5
DeepLab-CRF [76] ResNet-101 79.7
GCN[120] ResNet-152 82.2
Dynamic Routing [142] - 84.0
ReﬁneNet [117] ResNet-152 84.2
Wide ResNet [121] WideResNet-38 84.9
PSPNet [54] ResNet-101 85.4
DeeplabV3 [13] ResNet-101 85.7
PSANet [98] ResNet-101 85.7
EncNet [116] ResNet-101 85.9
DFN[99] ResNet-101 86.2
Exfuse [122] ResNet-101 86.2
SDN* [43] DenseNet-161 86.6
DIS [125] ResNet-101 86.8
APC-Net[58] ResNet-101 87.1
EMANet [95] ResNet-101 87.7
DeeplabV3+ [81] Xception-71 87.8
Exfuse [122] ResNeXt-131 87.9
MSCI [59] ResNet-152 88.0
EMANet [95] ResNet-152 88.2
DeeplabV3+[81] Xception-71 89.0
EfﬁcientNet+NAS-FPN [137] - 90.5
Models pre-trained on other datasets (MS-COCO, ImageNet, etc.).
5.2 Quantitative Performance of DL-Based Models
In this section we tabulate the performance of several
of the previously discussed algorithms on popular seg-
mentation benchmarks. Although most publications report
model performance on standard datasets and use standard
metrics, some of them fail to do so, making across-the-board
comparisons difﬁcult. Furthermore, only a few publications
provide additional information, such as execution time and
memory footprint, in a reproducible way, which is important
to industrial applications (such as drones, self-driving cars,
robotics, etc.) that may run on embedded systems with
limited computational power and storage, thus requiring
light-weight models.
The following tables summarize the performances of
several of the prominent DL-based segmentation models on
different datasets:
Table 1 focuses on the PASCAL VOC test set. Clearly,
there has been much improvement in the accuracy of the
models since the introduction of the ﬁrst DL-based image
segmentation model, the FCN.
Table 2 focuses on the Cityscape test dataset. The latest
models feature about 23% relative gain over the pioneering
FCN model on this dataset.
Table 3 focuses on the MS COCO stuff test set. This
dataset is more challenging than PASCAL VOC, and
Cityescapes, as the highest mIoU is approximately 40%.
Table 4 focuses on the ADE20k validation set. This
dataset is also more challenging than the PASCAL VOC
and Cityescapes datasets.
Table 5 provides the performance of prominent instance
segmentation algorithms on COCO test-dev 2017 dataset, in
terms of average precision, and their speed.TABLE 2
Accuracies of segmentation models on the Cityscapes dataset
Method Backbone mIoU
SegNet [25] - 57.0
FCN-8s [30] - 65.3
DPN [40] - 66.8
Dilation10 [77] - 67.1
DeeplabV2 [76] ResNet-101 70.4
ReﬁneNet [117] ResNet-101 73.6
FoveaNet [126] ResNet-101 74.1
Ladder DenseNet [127] Ladder DenseNet-169 73.7
GCN [120] ResNet-101 76.9
DUC-HDC [78] ResNet-101 77.6
Wide ResNet [121] WideResNet-38 78.4
PSPNet [54] ResNet-101 85.4
BiSeNet [128] ResNet-101 78.9
DFN [99] ResNet-101 79.3
PSANet [98] ResNet-101 80.1
DenseASPP [79] DenseNet-161 80.6
Dynamic Routing [142] - 80.7
SPGNet [129] 2xResNet-50 81.1
DANet [91] ResNet-101 81.5
CCNet [96] ResNet-101 81.4
DeeplabV3 [13] ResNet-101 81.3
IPC [141] ResNet-101 81.8
AC-Net [131] ResNet-101 82.3
OCR [42] ResNet-101 82.4
ResNeSt200 [93] ResNeSt-200 82.7
GS-CNN [130] WideResNet 82.8
HA-Net [94] ResNext-101 83.2
HRNetV2+OCR [42] HRNetV2-W48 83.7
Hierarchical MSA [139] HRNet-OCR 85.1
TABLE 3
Accuracies of segmentation models on the MS COCO stuff dataset
Method Backbone mIoU
ReﬁneNet [117] ResNet-101 33.6
CCN [57] Ladder DenseNet-101 35.7
DANet [91] ResNet-50 37.9
DSSPN [132] ResNet-101 37.3
EMA-Net [95] ResNet-50 37.5
SGR [133] ResNet-101 39.1
OCR [42] ResNet-101 39.5
DANet [91] ResNet-101 39.7
EMA-Net [95] ResNet-50 39.9
AC-Net [131] ResNet-101 40.1
OCR [42] HRNetV2-W48 40.5
Table 6 provides the performance of prominent panoptic
segmentation algorithms on MS-COCO val dataset, in terms
of panoptic quality [143].
Finally, Table 7 summarizes the performance of several
prominent models for RGB-D segmentation on the NYUD-v2
and SUN-RGBD datasets.
In summary, we have witnessed been signiﬁcant im-
provement in the performance of deep segmentation models
over the past 5–6 years, with a relative improvement of
25%-42% in mIoU on different datasets. However, some
publications suffer from lack of reproducibility for multiple
reasons—they report performance on non-standard bench-
marks/databases, or only on arbitrary subsets of the test
set from a popular benchmark, or they do not adequately
describe the experimental setup and sometimes evaluate
model performance only on a subset of object classes. Most
importantly, many publications do not provide the source-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
14 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
TABLE 4
Accuracies of segmentation models on the ADE20k validation dataset
Method Backbone mIoU
FCN [30] - 29.39
DilatedNet [77] - 32.31
CascadeNet [134] - 34.90
ReﬁneNet [117] ResNet-152 40.7
PSPNet [54] ResNet-101 43.29
PSPNet [54] ResNet-269 44.94
EncNet [116] ResNet-101 44.64
SAC [135] ResNet-101 44.3
PSANet [98] ResNet-101 43.70
UperNet [136] ResNet-101 42.66
DSSPN [132] ResNet-101 43.68
DM-Net [56] ResNet-101 45.50
AC-Net [131] ResNet-101 45.90
ResNeSt-101 [93] ResNeSt-101 46.91
ResNeSt-200 [93] ResNeSt-200 48.36
TABLE 5
Instance segmentation model performance on COCO test-dev 2017
Method Backbone FPS AP
YOLACT-550 [74] R-101-FPN 33.5 29.8
YOLACT-700 [74] R-101-FPN 23.8 31.2
RetinaMask [172] R-101-FPN 10.2 34.7
TensorMask [67] R-101-FPN 2.6 37.1
SharpMask [173] R-101-FPN 8.0 37.4
Mask-RCNN [62] R-101-FPN 10.6 37.9
CenterMask [72] R-101-FPN 13.2 38.3
code for their model implementations. Fortunately, with the
increasing popularity of deep learning models, the trend
has been positive and many research groups are moving
toward reproducible frameworks and open-sourcing their
implementations.
6 C HALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Without a doubt, image segmentation has beneﬁted greatly
from deep learning, but several challenges lie ahead. We will
next discuss some of the promising research directions that
we believe will help in further advancing image segmenta-
tion algorithms.
TABLE 6
Panoptic segmentation model performance on MS-COCO val
Method Backbone PQ
Panoptic FPN [144] ResNet-50 39.0
Panoptic FPN [144] ResNet-101 40.3
AU-Net [145] ResNet-50 39.6
Panoptic-DeepLab [147] Xception-71 39.7
OANet [174] ResNet-50 39.0
OANet [174] ResNet-101 40.7
AdaptIS [175] ResNet-50 35.9
AdaptIS [175] ResNet-101 37.0
UPSNet[148] ResNet-50 42.5
OCFusion[176] ResNet-50 41.3
OCFusion[176] ResNet-101 43.0
OCFusion[176] ResNeXt-101 45.7
Use of deformable convolution.TABLE 7
Segmentation model performance on the NYUD-v2 and SUN-RGBD
NYUD-v2 SUN-RGBD
Method m-Acc m-IoU m-Acc m-IoU
Mutex [177] - 31.5 - -
MS-CNN [178] 45.1 34.1 - -
FCN [30] 46.1 34.0 - -
Joint-Seg [179] 52.3 39.2 - -
SegNet [25] - - 44.76 31.84
Structured Net [39] 53.6 40.6 53.4 42.3
B-SegNet [180] - - 45.9 30.7
3D-GNN [181] 55.7 43.1 57.0 45.9
LSD-Net [46] 60.7 45.9 58.0 -
ReﬁneNet [117] 58.9 46.5 58.5 45.9
D-aware CNN [182] 61.1 48.4 53.5 42.0
MTI-Net [183] 62.9 49 - -
RDFNet [184] 62.8 50.1 60.1 47.7
ESANet-R34-NBt1D [140] - 50.3 - 48.17
G-Aware Net [185] 68.7 59.6 74.9 54.5
6.1 More Challenging Datasets
Several large-scale image datasets have been created for
semantic segmentation and instance segmentation. However,
there remains a need for more challenging datasets, as well as
datasets of different kinds of images. For still images, datasets
with a large number of objects and overlapping objects would
be very valuable. This can enable the training of models that
handle dense object scenarios better, as well as large overlaps
among objects as is common in real-world scenarios. With
the rising popularity of 3D image segmentation, especially
in medical image analysis, there is also a strong need for
large-scale annotated 3D image datasets, which are more
difﬁcult to create than their lower dimensional counterparts.
6.2 Combining DL and Earlier Segmentation Models
There is now broad agreement that the performance of DL-
based segmentation algorithms is plateauing, especially in
certain application domains such as medical image analysis.
To advance to the next level of performance, we must further
explore the combination of CNN-based image segmentation
models with prominent “classical” model-based image seg-
mentation methods. The integration of CNNs with graphical
models has been studied, but their integration with active
contours, graph cuts, and other segmentation models is fairly
recent and deserves further work.
6.3 Interpretable Deep Models
While DL-based models have achieved promising perfor-
mance on challenging benchmarks, there remain open
questions about these models. For example, what exactly
are deep models learning? How should we interpret the
features learned by these models? What is a minimal
neural architecture that can achieve a certain segmentation
accuracy on a given dataset? Although some techniques
are available to visualize the learned convolutional kernels
of these models, a comprehensive study of the underlying
behavior/dynamics of these models is lacking. A better
understanding of the theoretical aspects of these models
can enable the development of better models curated toward
various segmentation scenarios.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 15
6.4 Weakly-Supervised and Unsupervised Learning
Weakly-supervised (a.k.a. few shot) learning [186] and un-
supervised learning [187] are becoming very active research
areas. These techniques promise to be specially valuable for
image segmentation, as collecting pixel-accurately labeled
training images is problematic in many application domains,
particularly so in medical image analysis. The transfer
learning approach is to train a generic image segmentation
model on a large set of labeled samples (perhaps from
a public benchmark) and then ﬁne-tune that model on a
few samples from some speciﬁc target application. Self-
supervised learning is another promising direction that is
attracting much attraction in various ﬁelds. With the help
of self-supervised learning, many details in images can be
captured in order to train segmentation models with far
fewer training samples. Models based on reinforcement
learning could also be another potential future direction, as
they have scarcely received attention for image segmentation.
For example, MOREL [188] introduced a deep reinforcement
learning approach for moving object segmentation in videos.
6.5 Real-time Models for Various Applications
In many applications, accuracy is the most important factor;
however, there are applications in which it is also critical
to have segmentation models that can run in near real-time,
or at common camera frame rates (at least 25 frames per
second). This is useful for computer vision systems that are,
for example, deployed in autonomous vehicles. Most of the
current models are far from this frame-rate; e.g., FCN-8 takes
roughly 100 ms to process a low-resolution image. Models
based on dilated convolution help to increase the speed of
segmentation models to some extent, but there is still plenty
of room for improvement.
6.6 Memory Efﬁcient Models
Many modern segmentation models require a signiﬁcant
amount of memory even during the inference stage. So
far, much effort has been directed towards improving the
accuracy of such models, but in order to ﬁt them into
speciﬁc devices, such as mobile phones, the networks must be
simpliﬁed. This can be done either by using simpler models,
or by using model compression techniques, or even by
training a complex model and using knowledge distillation
techniques to compress it into a smaller, memory efﬁcient
network that mimics the complex model.
6.7 Applications
DL-based segmentation methods have been successfully
applied to satellite images in remote sensing [189], such as to
support urban planning [190] and precision agriculture [191].
Images collected by airborne platforms [192] and drones [193]
have also been segmented using DL-based segmentation
methods in order to address important environmental prob-
lems including ones related to climate change. The main
challenges of the remote sensing domain stem from the
typically formidable size of the imagery (often collected by
imaging spectrometers with hundreds or even thousands of
spectral bands) and the limited ground-truth information
necessary to evaluate the accuracy of the segmentationalgorithms. Similarly, DL-based segmentation techniques in
the evaluation of construction materials [194] face challenges
related to the massive volume of the related image data and
the limited reference information for validation purposes.
Last but not least, an important application ﬁeld for DL-
based segmentation has been biomedical imaging [195]. Here,
an opportunity is to design standardized image databases
useful in evaluating new infectious diseases and tracking
pandemics [196].
7 C ONCLUSIONS
We have surveyed image segmentation algorithms based
on deep learning models, which have achieved impres-
sive performance in various image segmentation tasks and
benchmarks, grouped into architectural categories such as:
CNN and FCN, RNN, R-CNN, dilated CNN, attention-
based models, generative and adversarial models, among
others. We have summarized the quantitative performance
of these models on some popular benchmarks, such as
the PASCAL VOC, MS COCO, Cityscapes, and ADE20k
datasets. Finally, we discussed some of the open challenges
and promising research directions for deep-learning-based
image segmentation in the coming years.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Tsung-Yi Lin of Google Brain as well as Jingdong
Wang and Yuhui Yuan of Microsoft Research Asia for
providing helpful comments that improved the manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Rosenfeld and A. C. Kak, Digital Picture Processing. Academic
Press, 1976.
[2] R. Szeliski, Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. Springer,
2010.
[3] D. Forsyth and J. Ponce, Computer Vision: A Modern Approach.
Prentice Hall, 2002.
[4] N. Otsu, “A threshold selection method from gray-level his-
tograms,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 62–66, 1979.
[5] R. Nock and F. Nielsen, “Statistical region merging,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 26,
no. 11, pp. 1452–1458, 2004.
[6] N. Dhanachandra, K. Manglem, and Y. J. Chanu, “Image seg-
mentation using K-means clustering algorithm and subtractive
clustering algorithm,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 54, pp. 764–
771, 2015.
[7] L. Najman and M. Schmitt, “Watershed of a continuous function,”
Signal Processing, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 99–112, 1994.
[8] M. Kass, A. Witkin, and D. Terzopoulos, “Snakes: Active contour
models,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 1, no. 4, pp.
321–331, 1988.
[9] Y. Boykov, O. Veksler, and R. Zabih, “Fast approximate energy
minimization via graph cuts,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1222–1239, 2001.
[10] N. Plath, M. Toussaint, and S. Nakajima, “Multi-class image
segmentation using conditional random ﬁelds and global classi-
ﬁcation,” in International Conference on Machine Learning. ACM,
2009, pp. 817–824.
[11] J.-L. Starck, M. Elad, and D. L. Donoho, “Image decomposition
via the combination of sparse representations and a variational
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 14, no. 10,
pp. 1570–1582, 2005.
[12] S. Minaee and Y. Wang, “An ADMM approach to masked signal
decomposition using subspace representation,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 3192–3204, 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
16 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
[13] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam, “Rethinking
atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.05587, 2017.
[14] S. Minaee, Y. Boykov, F. Porikli, A. Plaza, N. Kehtarnavaz, and
D. Terzopoulos, “Image segmentation using deep learning: A
survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.05566, 2020.
[15] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, P . Haffner et al., “Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 86, no. 11, pp. 2278–2324, 1998.
[16] K. Fukushima, “Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network
model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift
in position,” Biological Cybernetics, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 193–202, 1980.
[17] A. Waibel, T. Hanazawa, G. Hinton, K. Shikano, and K. J. Lang,
“Phoneme recognition using time-delay neural networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 328–339, 1989.
[18] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁ-
cation with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[19] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[20] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[21] https://colah.github.io/posts/2015-08-Understanding-LSTMs/.
[22] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, R. J. Williams et al., “Learning
representations by back-propagating errors,” Cognitive Modeling,
vol. 5, no. 3, p. 1, 1988.
[23] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,”
Neural Computation, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[24] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016.
[25] V . Badrinarayanan, A. Kendall, and R. Cipolla, “SegNet: A deep
convolutional encoder-decoder architecture for image segmenta-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 2481–2495, 2017.
[26] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
S. Ozair, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, “Generative adversarial
nets,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2014,
pp. 2672–2680.
[27] A. Radford, L. Metz, and S. Chintala, “Unsupervised represen-
tation learning with deep convolutional generative adversarial
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
[28] M. Mirza and S. Osindero, “Conditional generative adversarial
nets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1784, 2014.
[29] M. Arjovsky, S. Chintala, and L. Bottou, “Wasserstein GAN,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1701.07875, 2017.
[30] J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional
networks for semantic segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 3431–3440.
[31] G. Wang, W. Li, S. Ourselin, and T. Vercauteren, “Automatic brain
tumor segmentation using cascaded anisotropic convolutional
neural networks,” in International MICCAI Brainlesion Workshop.
Springer, 2017, pp. 178–190.
[32] Y. Li, H. Qi, J. Dai, X. Ji, and Y. Wei, “Fully convolutional instance-
aware semantic segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 2359–2367.
[33] Y. Yuan, M. Chao, and Y.-C. Lo, “Automatic skin lesion seg-
mentation using deep fully convolutional networks with Jaccard
distance,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 36, no. 9, pp.
1876–1886, 2017.
[34] N. Liu, H. Li, M. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Sun, and T. Tan, “Accurate
iris segmentation in non-cooperative environments using fully
convolutional networks,” in International Conference on Biometrics.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–8.
[35] W. Liu, A. Rabinovich, and A. C. Berg, “ParseNet: Looking wider
to see better,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.04579, 2015.
[36] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L.
Yuille, “Semantic image segmentation with deep convolutional
nets and fully connected CRFs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7062,
2014.
[37] A. G. Schwing and R. Urtasun, “Fully connected deep structured
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02351, 2015.
[38] S. Zheng, S. Jayasumana, B. Romera-Paredes, V . Vineet, Z. Su,
D. Du, C. Huang, and P . H. Torr, “Conditional random ﬁelds asrecurrent neural networks,” in IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1529–1537.
[39] G. Lin, C. Shen, A. Van Den Hengel, and I. Reid, “Efﬁcient
piecewise training of deep structured models for semantic seg-
mentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2016, pp. 3194–3203.
[40] Z. Liu, X. Li, P . Luo, C.-C. Loy, and X. Tang, “Semantic image
segmentation via deep parsing network,” in IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1377–1385.
[41] H. Noh, S. Hong, and B. Han, “Learning deconvolution network
for semantic segmentation,” in IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1520–1528.
[42] Y. Yuan, X. Chen, and J. Wang, “Object-contextual representations
for semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.11065, 2019.
[43] J. Fu, J. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, C. Wang, and H. Lu, “Stacked decon-
volutional network for semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, 2019.
[44] A. Chaurasia and E. Culurciello, “LinkNet: Exploiting encoder
representations for efﬁcient semantic segmentation,” in IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Visual Communications and Image Processing.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–4.
[45] X. Xia and B. Kulis, “W-Net: A deep model for fully unsupervised
image segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08506, 2017.
[46] Y. Cheng, R. Cai, Z. Li, X. Zhao, and K. Huang, “Locality-sensitive
deconvolution networks with gated fusion for RGB-D indoor
semantic segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 3029–3037.
[47] O. Ronneberger, P . Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention. Springer, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[48] Z. Zhou, M. M. R. Siddiquee, N. Tajbakhsh, and J. Liang, “UNet++:
A nested U-Net architecture for medical image segmentation,” in
Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning
for Clinical Decision Support. Springer, 2018, pp. 3–11.
[49] Z. Zhang, Q. Liu, and Y. Wang, “Road extraction by deep residual
U-Net,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 15, no. 5,
pp. 749–753, 2018.
[50] ¨O. C ¸ic ¸ek, A. Abdulkadir, S. S. Lienkamp, T. Brox, and O. Ron-
neberger, “3D U-Net: learning dense volumetric segmentation
from sparse annotation,” in International Conference on Medical
Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer,
2016, pp. 424–432.
[51] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-Net: Fully convo-
lutional neural networks for volumetric medical image segmen-
tation,” in International Conference on 3D Vision. IEEE, 2016, pp.
565–571.
[52] T. Brosch, L. Y. Tang, Y. Yoo, D. K. Li, A. Traboulsee, and R. Tam,
“Deep 3D convolutional encoder networks with shortcuts for
multiscale feature integration applied to multiple sclerosis lesion
segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 35, no. 5,
pp. 1229–1239, 2016.
[53] T.-Y. Lin, P . Doll ´ar, R. Girshick, K. He, B. Hariharan, and S. Be-
longie, “Feature pyramid networks for object detection,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp.
2117–2125.
[54] H. Zhao, J. Shi, X. Qi, X. Wang, and J. Jia, “Pyramid scene parsing
network,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 2881–2890.
[55] G. Ghiasi and C. C. Fowlkes, “Laplacian pyramid reconstruction
and reﬁnement for semantic segmentation,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision. Springer, 2016, pp. 519–534.
[56] J. He, Z. Deng, and Y. Qiao, “Dynamic multi-scale ﬁlters for se-
mantic segmentation,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2019, pp. 3562–3572.
[57] H. Ding, X. Jiang, B. Shuai, A. Qun Liu, and G. Wang, “Context
contrasted feature and gated multi-scale aggregation for scene
segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018, pp. 2393–2402.
[58] J. He, Z. Deng, L. Zhou, Y. Wang, and Y. Qiao, “Adaptive pyramid
context network for semantic segmentation,” in Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 7519–7528.
[59] D. Lin, Y. Ji, D. Lischinski, D. Cohen-Or, and H. Huang, “Multi-
scale context intertwining for semantic segmentation,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2018, pp. 603–619.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 17
[60] G. Li, Y. Xie, L. Lin, and Y. Yu, “Instance-level salient object
segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 2386–2395.
[61] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, “Faster R-CNN: Towards
real-time object detection with region proposal networks,” in
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015, pp. 91–99.
[62] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P . Doll ´ar, and R. Girshick, “Mask R-CNN,” in
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 2961–
2969.
[63] S. Liu, L. Qi, H. Qin, J. Shi, and J. Jia, “Path aggregation network
for instance segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 8759–8768.
[64] J. Dai, K. He, and J. Sun, “Instance-aware semantic segmentation
via multi-task network cascades,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 3150–3158.
[65] R. Hu, P . Doll ´ar, K. He, T. Darrell, and R. Girshick, “Learning to
segment every thing,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 4233–4241.
[66] L.-C. Chen, A. Hermans, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, P . Wang,
and H. Adam, “Masklab: Instance segmentation by reﬁning object
detection with semantic and direction features,” in IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 4013–4022.
[67] X. Chen, R. Girshick, K. He, and P . Doll ´ar, “Tensormask:
A foundation for dense object segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1903.12174, 2019.
[68] J. Dai, Y. Li, K. He, and J. Sun, “R-FCN: Object detection via
region-based fully convolutional networks,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2016, pp. 379–387.
[69] P . O. Pinheiro, R. Collobert, and P . Doll ´ar, “Learning to segment
object candidates,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2015, pp. 1990–1998.
[70] E. Xie, P . Sun, X. Song, W. Wang, X. Liu, D. Liang, C. Shen, and
P . Luo, “PolarMask: Single shot instance segmentation with polar
representation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.13226, 2019.
[71] Z. Hayder, X. He, and M. Salzmann, “Boundary-aware instance
segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 5696–5704.
[72] Y. Lee and J. Park, “CenterMask: Real-time anchor-free instance
segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2020, pp. 13 906–13 915.
[73] M. Bai and R. Urtasun, “Deep watershed transform for instance
segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 5221–5229.
[74] D. Bolya, C. Zhou, F. Xiao, and Y. J. Lee, “YOLACT: Real-
time instance segmentation,” in IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 9157–9166.
[75] A. Fathi, Z. Wojna, V . Rathod, P . Wang, H. O. Song, S. Guadarrama,
and K. P . Murphy, “Semantic instance segmentation via deep
metric learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.10277, 2017.
[76] L.-C. Chen, G. Papandreou, I. Kokkinos, K. Murphy, and A. L.
Yuille, “DeepLab: Semantic image segmentation with deep convo-
lutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected crfs,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 40,
no. 4, pp. 834–848, 2017.
[77] F. Yu and V . Koltun, “Multi-scale context aggregation by dilated
convolutions,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.07122, 2015.
[78] P . Wang, P . Chen, Y. Yuan, D. Liu, Z. Huang, X. Hou, and G. Cot-
trell, “Understanding convolution for semantic segmentation,” in
IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, 2018, pp.
1451–1460.
[79] M. Yang, K. Yu, C. Zhang, Z. Li, and K. Yang, “DenseASPP for
semantic segmentation in street scenes,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 3684–3692.
[80] A. Paszke, A. Chaurasia, S. Kim, and E. Culurciello, “ENet: A deep
neural network architecture for real-time semantic segmentation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02147, 2016.
[81] L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for semantic
image segmentation,” in European Conference on Computer Vision,
2018, pp. 801–818.
[82] F. Visin, M. Ciccone, A. Romero, K. Kastner, K. Cho, Y. Bengio,
M. Matteucci, and A. Courville, “ReSeg: A recurrent neural
network-based model for semantic segmentation,” in IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2016,
pp. 41–48.[83] F. Visin, K. Kastner, K. Cho, M. Matteucci, A. Courville, and
Y. Bengio, “ReNet: A recurrent neural network based alternative
to convolutional networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1505.00393, 2015.
[84] W. Byeon, T. M. Breuel, F. Raue, and M. Liwicki, “Scene labeling
with LSTM recurrent neural networks,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 3547–3555.
[85] X. Liang, X. Shen, J. Feng, L. Lin, and S. Yan, “Semantic object
parsing with graph LSTM,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision. Springer, 2016, pp. 125–143.
[86] Y. Xiang and D. Fox, “DA-RNN: Semantic mapping with data
associated recurrent neural networks,” arXiv:1703.03098, 2017.
[87] R. Hu, M. Rohrbach, and T. Darrell, “Segmentation from natural
language expressions,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 108–124.
[88] L.-C. Chen, Y. Yang, J. Wang, W. Xu, and A. L. Yuille, “Attention
to scale: Scale-aware semantic image segmentation,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp.
3640–3649.
[89] Q. Huang, C. Xia, C. Wu, S. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Song, and C.-C. J. Kuo,
“Semantic segmentation with reverse attention,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06426, 2017.
[90] H. Li, P . Xiong, J. An, and L. Wang, “Pyramid attention network
for semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.10180, 2018.
[91] J. Fu, J. Liu, H. Tian, Y. Li, Y. Bao, Z. Fang, and H. Lu, “Dual
attention network for scene segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 3146–3154.
[92] Y. Yuan and J. Wang, “OCNet: Object context network for scene
parsing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00916, 2018.
[93] H. Zhang, C. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Z. Zhang, H. Lin, Y. Sun,
T. He, J. Mueller, R. Manmatha et al., “Resnest: Split-attention
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.08955, 2020.
[94] S. Choi, J. T. Kim, and J. Choo, “Cars can’t ﬂy up in the sky:
Improving urban-scene segmentation via height-driven attention
networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 9373–9383.
[95] X. Li, Z. Zhong, J. Wu, Y. Yang, Z. Lin, and H. Liu, “Expectation-
maximization attention networks for semantic segmentation,” in
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 9167–
9176.
[96] Z. Huang, X. Wang, L. Huang, C. Huang, Y. Wei, and W. Liu,
“CCNet: Criss-cross attention for semantic segmentation,” in IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 603–612.
[97] M. Ren and R. S. Zemel, “End-to-end instance segmentation with
recurrent attention,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2017, pp. 6656–6664.
[98] H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Shi, C. Change Loy, D. Lin, and J. Jia,
“PSANet: Point-wise spatial attention network for scene parsing,”
inEuropean Conference on Computer Vision, 2018, pp. 267–283.
[99] C. Yu, J. Wang, C. Peng, C. Gao, G. Yu, and N. Sang, “Learning
a discriminative feature network for semantic segmentation,” in
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018,
pp. 1857–1866.
[100] P . Luc, C. Couprie, S. Chintala, and J. Verbeek, “Semantic segmen-
tation using adversarial networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.08408,
2016.
[101] N. Souly, C. Spampinato, and M. Shah, “Semi supervised semantic
segmentation using generative adversarial network,” in IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 5688–5696.
[102] W.-C. Hung, Y.-H. Tsai, Y.-T. Liou, Y.-Y. Lin, and M.-H. Yang,
“Adversarial learning for semi-supervised semantic segmentation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07934, 2018.
[103] Y. Xue, T. Xu, H. Zhang, L. R. Long, and X. Huang, “SegAN:
Adversarial network with multi-scale L1 loss for medical image
segmentation,” Neuroinformatics , vol. 16, no. 3-4, pp. 383–392, 2018.
[104] M. Majurski, P . Manescu, S. Padi, N. Schaub, N. Hotaling, C. Si-
mon Jr, and P . Bajcsy, “Cell image segmentation using generative
adversarial networks, transfer learning, and augmentations,”
inIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Workshops, 2019, pp. 0–0.
[105] K. Ehsani, R. Mottaghi, and A. Farhadi, “SegAN: Segmenting and
generating the invisible,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 6144–6153.
[106] T. F. Chan and L. A. Vese, “Active contours without edges,” IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 266–277, 2001.
[107] X. Chen, B. M. Williams, S. R. Vallabhaneni, G. Czanner,
R. Williams, and Y. Zheng, “Learning active contour models for
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
18 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
medical image segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 11 632–11 640.
[108] S. Gur, L. Wolf, L. Golgher, and P . Blinder, “Unsupervised
microvascular image segmentation using an active contours
mimicking neural network,” in IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 10 722–10 731.
[109] P . Marquez-Neila, L. Baumela, and L. Alvarez, “A morphological
approach to curvature-based evolution of curves and surfaces,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 2–17, 2014.
[110] T. H. N. Le, K. G. Quach, K. Luu, C. N. Duong, and M. Savvides,
“Reformulating level sets as deep recurrent neural network
approach to semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 2393–2407, 2018.
[111] C. Rupprecht, E. Huaroc, M. Baust, and N. Navab, “Deep active
contours,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05074, 2016.
[112] A. Hatamizadeh, A. Hoogi, D. Sengupta, W. Lu, B. Wilcox,
D. Rubin, and D. Terzopoulos, “Deep active lesion segmentation,”
inInternational Workshop on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11861. Springer,
2019, pp. 98–105.
[113] D. Marcos, D. Tuia, B. Kellenberger, L. Zhang, M. Bai, R. Liao,
and R. Urtasun, “Learning deep structured active contours end-to-
end,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2018, pp. 8877–8885.
[114] D. Cheng, R. Liao, S. Fidler, and R. Urtasun, “DARNet: Deep
active ray network for building segmentation,” in IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 7431–7439.
[115] A. Hatamizadeh, D. Sengupta, and D. Terzopoulos, “End-to-end
trainable deep active contour models for automated image seg-
mentation: Delineating buildings in aerial imagery,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2020, pp. 730–746.
[116] H. Zhang, K. Dana, J. Shi, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, A. Tyagi, and
A. Agrawal, “Context encoding for semantic segmentation,” in
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018,
pp. 7151–7160.
[117] G. Lin, A. Milan, C. Shen, and I. Reid, “ReﬁneNet: Multi-path
reﬁnement networks for high-resolution semantic segmentation,”
inIEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017,
pp. 1925–1934.
[118] G. Song, H. Myeong, and K. Mu Lee, “SeedNet: Automatic seed
generation with deep reinforcement learning for robust interactive
segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2018, pp. 1760–1768.
[119] J. Dai, K. He, and J. Sun, “BoxSup: Exploiting bounding boxes to
supervise convolutional networks for semantic segmentation,” in
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1635–
1643.
[120] C. Peng, X. Zhang, G. Yu, G. Luo, and J. Sun, “Large kernel
matters — improve semantic segmentation by global convolu-
tional network,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 4353–4361.
[121] Z. Wu, C. Shen, and A. Van Den Hengel, “Wider or deeper:
Revisiting the resnet model for visual recognition,” Pattern
Recognition, vol. 90, pp. 119–133, 2019.
[122] Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Peng, X. Xue, and J. Sun, “ExFuse:
Enhancing feature fusion for semantic segmentation,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2018, pp. 269–284.
[123] M. Mostajabi, P . Yadollahpour, and G. Shakhnarovich, “Feedfor-
ward semantic segmentation with zoom-out features,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp.
3376–3385.
[124] W. Wang, J. Shen, and F. Porikli, “Saliency-aware geodesic video
object segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 3395–3402.
[125] P . Luo, G. Wang, L. Lin, and X. Wang, “Deep dual learning for
semantic image segmentation,” in IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 2718–2726.
[126] X. Li, Z. Jie, W. Wang, C. Liu, J. Yang, X. Shen, Z. Lin, Q. Chen,
S. Yan, and J. Feng, “FoveaNet: Perspective-aware urban scene
parsing,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017,
pp. 784–792.
[127] I. Kreso, S. Segvic, and J. Krapac, “Ladder-style densenets for se-
mantic segmentation of large natural images,” in IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 238–245.[128] C. Yu, J. Wang, C. Peng, C. Gao, G. Yu, and N. Sang, “BiSeNet:
Bilateral segmentation network for real-time semantic segmenta-
tion,” in European Conference on Computer Vision, 2018, pp. 325–341.
[129] B. Cheng, L.-C. Chen, Y. Wei, Y. Zhu, Z. Huang, J. Xiong, T. S.
Huang, W.-M. Hwu, and H. Shi, “SPGNet: Semantic prediction
guidance for scene parsing,” in IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 5218–5228.
[130] T. Takikawa, D. Acuna, V . Jampani, and S. Fidler, “Gated-SCNN:
Gated shape cnns for semantic segmentation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 5229–5238.
[131] J. Fu, J. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Bao, J. Tang, and H. Lu, “Adaptive
context network for scene parsing,” in IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 6748–6757.
[132] X. Liang, H. Zhou, and E. Xing, “Dynamic-structured semantic
propagation network,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 752–761.
[133] X. Liang, Z. Hu, H. Zhang, L. Lin, and E. P . Xing, “Symbolic graph
reasoning meets convolutions,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 1853–1863.
[134] B. Zhou, H. Zhao, X. Puig, S. Fidler, A. Barriuso, and A. Torralba,
“Scene parsing through ADE20K dataset,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017.
[135] R. Zhang, S. Tang, Y. Zhang, J. Li, and S. Yan, “Scale-adaptive
convolutions for scene parsing,” in IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 2031–2039.
[136] T. Xiao, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Jiang, and J. Sun, “Uniﬁed perceptual
parsing for scene understanding,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision, 2018, pp. 418–434.
[137] B. Zoph, G. Ghiasi, T.-Y. Lin, Y. Cui, H. Liu, E. D. Cubuk, and
Q. V . Le, “Rethinking pre-training and self-training,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.06882, 2020.
[138] X. Zhang, H. Xu, H. Mo, J. Tan, C. Yang, and W. Ren, “DCNAS:
Densely connected neural architecture search for semantic image
segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11883, 2020.
[139] A. Tao, K. Sapra, and B. Catanzaro, “Hierarchical multi-scale atten-
tion for semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10821,
2020.
[140] D. Seichter, M. K ¨ohler, B. Lewandowski, T. Wengefeld, and H.-M.
Gross, “Efﬁcient rgb-d semantic segmentation for indoor scene
analysis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.06961, 2020.
[141] M. Zhen, J. Wang, L. Zhou, S. Li, T. Shen, J. Shang, T. Fang, and
L. Quan, “Joint semantic segmentation and boundary detection
using iterative pyramid contexts,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp.
13 666–13 675.
[142] Y. Li, L. Song, Y. Chen, Z. Li, X. Zhang, X. Wang, and J. Sun,
“Learning dynamic routing for semantic segmentation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2020, pp. 8553–8562.
[143] A. Kirillov, K. He, R. Girshick, C. Rother, and P . Doll ´ar, “Panoptic
segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2019, pp. 9404–9413.
[144] A. Kirillov, R. Girshick, K. He, and P . Dollar, “Panoptic feature
pyramid networks,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 6399–6408.
[145] Y. Li, X. Chen, Z. Zhu, L. Xie, G. Huang, D. Du, and X. Wang,
“Attention-guided uniﬁed network for panoptic segmentation,” in
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019.
[146] L. Porzi, S. R. Bulo, A. Colovic, and P . Kontschieder, “Seamless
scene segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 8277–8286.
[147] B. Cheng, M. D. Collins, Y. Zhu, T. Liu, T. S. Huang, H. Adam, and
L.-C. Chen, “Panoptic-DeepLab,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.04751,
2019.
[148] Y. Xiong, R. Liao, H. Zhao, R. Hu, M. Bai, E. Yumer, and R. Urtasun,
“UPSNet: A uniﬁed panoptic segmentation network,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp.
8818–8826.
[149] R. Mohan and A. Valada, “EfﬁcientPS: Efﬁcient panoptic segmen-
tation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02307, 2020.
[150] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zis-
serman, “The PASCAL visual object classes (VOC) challenge,”
International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 88, pp. 303–338, 2010.
[151] http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2012/.
[152] R. Mottaghi, X. Chen, X. Liu, N.-G. Cho, S.-W. Lee, S. Fidler,
R. Urtasun, and A. Yuille, “The role of context for object detection
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
S. MINAEE et al.: IMAGE SEGMENTATION USING DEEP LEARNING: A SURVEY 19
and semantic segmentation in the wild,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2014, pp. 891–898.
[153] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P . Perona, D. Ramanan,
P . Doll ´ar, and C. L. Zitnick, “Microsoft COCO: Common objects
in context,” in European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer,
2014.
[154] M. Cordts, M. Omran, S. Ramos, T. Rehfeld, M. Enzweiler, R. Be-
nenson, U. Franke, S. Roth, and B. Schiele, “The cityscapes dataset
for semantic urban scene understanding,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 3213–3223.
[155] C. Liu, J. Yuen, and A. Torralba, “Nonparametric scene parsing:
Label transfer via dense scene alignment,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009.
[156] S. Gould, R. Fulton, and D. Koller, “Decomposing a scene into
geometric and semantically consistent regions,” in International
Conference on Computer Vision. IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–8.
[157] D. Martin, C. Fowlkes, D. Tal, and J. Malik, “A database of
human segmented natural images and its application to evaluating
segmentation algorithms and measuring ecological statistics,” in
International Conference on Computer Vision, vol. 2, July 2001, pp.
416–423.
[158] A. Prest, C. Leistner, J. Civera, C. Schmid, and V . Ferrari, “Learning
object class detectors from weakly annotated video,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. IEEE, 2012,
pp. 3282–3289.
[159] S. D. Jain and K. Grauman, “Supervoxel-consistent foreground
propagation in video,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2014, pp. 656–671.
[160] A. Geiger, P . Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets
robotics: The KITTI dataset,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237, 2013.
[161] J. M. Alvarez, T. Gevers, Y. LeCun, and A. M. Lopez, “Road scene
segmentation from a single image,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision. Springer, 2012, pp. 376–389.
[162] B. Hariharan, P . Arbel ´aez, L. Bourdev, S. Maji, and J. Malik, “Se-
mantic contours from inverse detectors,” in International Conference
on Computer Vision. IEEE, 2011, pp. 991–998.
[163] X. Chen, R. Mottaghi, X. Liu, S. Fidler, R. Urtasun, and A. Yuille,
“Detect what you can: Detecting and representing objects using
holistic models and body parts,” in IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2014, pp. 1971–1978.
[164] G. Ros, L. Sellart, J. Materzynska, D. Vazquez, and A. M. Lopez,
“The SYNTHIA dataset: A large collection of synthetic images for
semantic segmentation of urban scenes,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 3234–3243.
[165] X. Shen, A. Hertzmann, J. Jia, S. Paris, B. Price, E. Shechtman, and
I. Sachs, “Automatic portrait segmentation for image stylization,”
inComputer Graphics Forum, vol. 35, no. 2. Wiley Online Library,
2016, pp. 93–102.
[166] N. Silberman, D. Hoiem, P . Kohli, and R. Fergus, “Indoor segmen-
tation and support inference from RGBD images,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2012, pp. 746–760.
[167] J. Xiao, A. Owens, and A. Torralba, “Sun3D: A database of
big spaces reconstructed using SFM and object labels,” in IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2013, pp. 1625–1632.
[168] S. Song, S. P . Lichtenberg, and J. Xiao, “Sun RGB-D: A RGB-D
scene understanding benchmark suite,” in IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2015, pp. 567–576.
[169] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and
M. Nießner, “ScanNet: Richly-annotated 3D reconstructions of
indoor scenes,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2017, pp. 5828–5839.
[170] I. Armeni, A. Sax, A. Zamir, and S. Savarese, “Joint 2D-3D-
Semantic Data for Indoor Scene Understanding,” ArXiv e-prints,
Feb. 2017.
[171] K. Lai, L. Bo, X. Ren, and D. Fox, “A large-scale hierarchical multi-
view RGB-D object dataset,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 2011, pp. 1817–1824.
[172] C.-Y. Fu, M. Shvets, and A. C. Berg, “RetinaMask: Learning to
predict masks improves state-of-the-art single-shot detection for
free,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.03353, 2019.
[173] P . O. Pinheiro, T.-Y. Lin, R. Collobert, and P . Doll ´ar, “Learning to
reﬁne object segments,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2016, pp. 75–91.
[174] H. Liu, C. Peng, C. Yu, J. Wang, X. Liu, G. Yu, and W. Jiang,
“An end-to-end network for panoptic segmentation,” in IEEEConference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp.
6172–6181.
[175] K. Soﬁiuk, O. Barinova, and A. Konushin, “AdaptIS: Adaptive
instance selection network,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp. 7355–7363.
[176] J. Lazarow, K. Lee, K. Shi, and Z. Tu, “Learning instance occlusion
for panoptic segmentation,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 10 720–10 729.
[177] Z. Deng, S. Todorovic, and L. Jan Latecki, “Semantic segmentation
of RGBD images with mutex constraints,” in IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2015, pp. 1733–1741.
[178] D. Eigen and R. Fergus, “Predicting depth, surface normals
and semantic labels with a common multi-scale convolutional
architecture,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
2015, pp. 2650–2658.
[179] A. Mousavian, H. Pirsiavash, and J. Kosecka, “Joint semantic
segmentation and depth estimation with deep convolutional
networks,” in International Conference on 3D Vision. IEEE, 2016.
[180] A. Kendall, V . Badrinarayanan, and R. Cipolla, “Bayesian SegNet:
Model uncertainty in deep convolutional encoder-decoder archi-
tectures for scene understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.02680,
2015.
[181] X. Qi, R. Liao, J. Jia, S. Fidler, and R. Urtasun, “3D graph neural
networks for RGBD semantic segmentation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 5199–5208.
[182] W. Wang and U. Neumann, “Depth-aware CNN for RGB-D
segmentation,” in European Conference on Computer Vision, 2018,
pp. 135–150.
[183] S. Vandenhende, S. Georgoulis, and L. Van Gool, “Mti-net: Multi-
scale task interaction networks for multi-task learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.06902, 2020.
[184] S.-J. Park, K.-S. Hong, and S. Lee, “RDFNet: RGB-D multi-level
residual feature fusion for indoor semantic segmentation,” in IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 4980–4989.
[185] J. Jiao, Y. Wei, Z. Jie, H. Shi, R. W. Lau, and T. S. Huang, “Geometry-
aware distillation for indoor semantic segmentation,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp.
2869–2878.
[186] Z.-H. Zhou, “A brief introduction to weakly supervised learning,”
National Science Review, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 44–53, 2018.
[187] L. Jing and Y. Tian, “Self-supervised visual feature learning with
deep neural networks: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2020.
[188] V . Goel, J. Weng, and P . Poupart, “Unsupervised video object
segmentation for deep reinforcement learning,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018, pp. 5683–5694.
[189] L. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Ye, G. Yin, and B. A. Johnson, “Deep
learning in remote sensing applications: A meta-analysis and
review,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol.
152, pp. 166 – 177, 2019.
[190] L. Gao, Y. Zhang, F. Zou, J. Shao, and J. Lai, “Unsupervised urban
scene segmentation via domain adaptation,” Neurocomputing, vol.
406, pp. 295 – 301, 2020.
[191] M. Paoletti, J. Haut, J. Plaza, and A. Plaza, “Deep learning
classiﬁers for hyperspectral imaging: A review,” ISPRS Journal of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, vol. 158, pp. 279 – 317, 2019.
[192] J. F. Abrams, A. Vashishtha, S. T. Wong, A. Nguyen, A. Mo-
hamed, S. Wieser, A. Kuijper, A. Wilting, and A. Mukhopadhyay,
“Habitat-Net: Segmentation of habitat images using deep learning,”
Ecological Informatics, vol. 51, pp. 121 – 128, 2019.
[193] M. Kerkech, A. Haﬁane, and R. Canals, “Vine disease detection in
UAV multispectral images using optimized image registration and
deep learning segmentation approach,” Computers and Electronics
in Agriculture, vol. 174, p. 105446, 2020.
[194] Y. Song, Z. Huang, C. Shen, H. Shi, and D. A. Lange, “Deep
learning-based automated image segmentation for concrete petro-
graphic analysis,” Cement and Concrete Research, vol. 135, p. 106118,
2020.
[195] N. Tajbakhsh, L. Jeyaseelan, Q. Li, J. N. Chiang, Z. Wu, and
X. Ding, “Embracing imperfect datasets: A review of deep learning
solutions for medical image segmentation,” Medical Image Analysis,
vol. 63, p. 101693, 2020.
[196] A. Amyar, R. Modzelewski, H. Li, and S. Ruan, “Multi-task
deep learning based CT imaging analysis for COVID-19 pneumo-
nia: Classiﬁcation and segmentation,” Computers in Biology and
Medicine, vol. 126, p. 104037, 2020.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 0162-8828 (c) 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TPAMI.2021.3059968, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
20 TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANAL YSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE, VOL. ??, NO.??, ?? 2021
Shervin Minaee is a machine learning lead in
the computer vision team at Snapchat, Inc. He
received his PhD in Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science from New York University, in
2018. His research interests include computer
vision, image segmentation, biometric recogni-
tion, and applied deep learning. He has published
more than 40 papers and patents during his PhD.
He previously worked as a research scientist at
Samsung Research, AT&T Labs, Huawei Labs,
and as a data scientist at Expedia group. He has
been a reviewer for more than 20 computer vision related journals from
IEEE, ACM, Elsevier, and Springer. He has won several awards, including
the best research presentation at Samsung Research America in 2017
and the Verizon Open Innovation Challenge Award in 2016.
Yuri Boykov is a Professor in the Cheriton
School of Computer Science at the University
of Waterloo. His research is concentrated in the
area of computer vision and biomedical image
analysis with focus on modeling and optimization
for structured segmentation, restoration, regis-
tration, stereo, motion, model ﬁtting, recognition,
photo-video editing and other data analysis prob-
lems. He is an editor for the International Journal
of Computer Vision (IJCV). His work was listed
among the 10 most inﬂuential papers in IEEE
TPAMI (Top Picks for 30 years). In 2017 Google Scholar listed his work
on segmentation as a “classic paper in computer vision and pattern
recognition” (from 2006). In 2011 he received the Helmholtz Prize from
the IEEE and the Test of Time Award from the International Conference
on Computer Vision.
Fatih Porikli is an IEEE Fellow and a Senior
Director at Qualcomm, San Diego. He was a
full Professor in the Research School of Engi-
neering at the Australian National University and,
until recently, a Vice President at Huawei CBG
Device; Hardware, San Diego. He led the Com-
puter Vision Research Group at NICTA, Australia,
and was a Distinguished Research Scientist at
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cam-
bridge, MA. He received his PhD degree from
New Y ork University in 2002. He was the recipient
of the R&D 100 Scientist of the Year Award in 2006. He won six best
paper awards, authored more than 250 papers, co-edited two books,
and invented over 100 patents. He has served as the General Chair and
Technical Program Chair of many IEEE conferences and as an Associate
Editor of premier IEEE and Springer journals for the past 15 years.
Antonio Plaza is an IEEE Fellow and a professor
in the Department of Technology of Computers
and Communications at the University of Ex-
tremadura, where he received the MSc degree
in 1999 and the PhD degree in 2002, both in
Computer Engineering. He has authored more
than 600 publications, including 300 JCR journal
papers (more than 170 in IEEE journals), 24 book
chapters, and over 300 peer-reviewed conference
proceedings papers. He is a recipient of the Best
Column Award of the IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine in 2015, the 2013 Best Paper Award of the JSTARS journal,
and the most highly cited paper (2005–2010) in the Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing. He is included in the 2018, 2019 and 2020
Highly Cited Researchers List.
Nasser Kehtarnavaz is a Distinguished Profes-
sor in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering at the University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX. His research interests include
signal and image processing, machine learning,
and real-time implementation on embedded pro-
cessors. He has authored or co-authored ten
books and more than 390 journal papers, con-
ference papers, patents, manuals, and editorials
in these areas. He is a Fellow of the SPIE, a
licensed Professional Engineer, and Editor-in-
Chief of the Journal of Real-Time Image Processing.
Demetri Terzopoulos is a Distinguished Profes-
sor and Chancellor’s Professor of Computer Sci-
ence at the University of California, Los Angeles,
where he directs the UCLA Computer Graphics
& Vision Laboratory, and is Co-Founder and
Chief Scientist of VoxelCloud, Inc. He received
his PhD degree in Artiﬁcial Intelligence from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in
1984. He is or was a Guggenheim Fellow, a
Fellow of the ACM, IEEE, IETI, Royal Society
of Canada, and Royal Society of London, and a
Member of the European Academy of Sciences, the New Y ork Academy
of Sciences, and Sigma Xi. Among his many awards are an Academy
Award from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for
his pioneering work on physics-based computer animation, and the
Computer Pioneer Award, Helmholtz Prize, and inaugural Computer
Vision Distinguished Researcher Award from the IEEE for his pioneering
and sustained research on deformable models and their applications.
Deformable models, a term he coined, is listed in the IEEE Taxonomy.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 28,2021 at 14:10:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 